1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Sep 4;20(18):4331. doi: 10.3390/ijms20184331.

Molecular Docking: Shifting Paradigms in Drug Discovery.

Pinzi L(1), Rastelli G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via 
Giuseppe Campi 103, 41125 Modena, Italy. luca.pinzi@unimore.it.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via 
Giuseppe Campi 103, 41125 Modena, Italy.

Molecular docking is an established in silico structure-based method widely used 
in drug discovery. Docking enables the identification of novel compounds of 
therapeutic interest, predicting ligand-target interactions at a molecular 
level, or delineating structure-activity relationships (SAR), without knowing a 
priori the chemical structure of other target modulators. Although it was 
originally developed to help understanding the mechanisms of molecular 
recognition between small and large molecules, uses and applications of docking 
in drug discovery have heavily changed over the last years. In this review, we 
describe how molecular docking was firstly applied to assist in drug discovery 
tasks. Then, we illustrate newer and emergent uses and applications of docking, 
including prediction of adverse effects, polypharmacology, drug repurposing, and 
target fishing and profiling, discussing also future applications and further 
potential of this technique when combined with emergent techniques, such as 
artificial intelligence.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20184331
PMCID: PMC6769923
PMID: 31487867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2019 Sep;40(9):624-635. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2019.07.005. 
Epub 2019 Aug 2.

Artificial Intelligence for Drug Toxicity and Safety.

Basile AO(1), Yahi A(1), Tatonetti NP(2).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
nick.tatonetti@columbia.edu.

Interventional pharmacology is one of medicine's most potent weapons against 
disease. These drugs, however, can result in damaging side effects and must be 
closely monitored. Pharmacovigilance is the field of science that monitors, 
detects, and prevents adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Safety efforts begin during 
the development process, using in vivo and in vitro studies, continue through 
clinical trials, and extend to postmarketing surveillance of ADRs in real-world 
populations. Future toxicity and safety challenges, including increased 
polypharmacy and patient diversity, stress the limits of these traditional 
tools. Massive amounts of newly available data present an opportunity for using 
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to improve drug safety 
science. Here, we explore recent advances as applied to preclinical drug safety 
and postmarketing surveillance with a specific focus on machine and deep 
learning (DL) approaches.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2019.07.005
PMCID: PMC6710127
PMID: 31383376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors do not have 
any conflicts of interest to declare.


3. Genes (Basel). 2020 Oct 30;11(11):1295. doi: 10.3390/genes11111295.

A Review of the Important Role of CYP2D6 in Pharmacogenomics.

Taylor C(1)(2), Crosby I(2), Yip V(1), Maguire P(2), Pirmohamed M(1), Turner 
RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Personalised Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool 
L69 3BX, UK.
(2)MC Diagnostics, St Asaph Business Park, Saint Asaph LL17 0LJ, UK.

Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) is a critical pharmacogene involved in the 
metabolism of ~20% of commonly used drugs across a broad spectrum of medical 
disciplines including psychiatry, pain management, oncology and cardiology. 
Nevertheless, CYP2D6 is highly polymorphic with single-nucleotide polymorphisms, 
small insertions/deletions and larger structural variants including 
multiplications, deletions, tandem arrangements, and hybridisations with 
non-functional CYP2D7 pseudogenes. The frequency of these variants differs 
across populations, and they significantly influence the drug-metabolising 
enzymatic function of CYP2D6. Importantly, altered CYP2D6 function has been 
associated with both adverse drug reactions and reduced drug efficacy, and there 
is growing recognition of the clinical and economic burdens associated with 
suboptimal drug utilisation. To date, pharmacogenomic clinical guidelines for at 
least 48 CYP2D6-substrate drugs have been developed by prominent 
pharmacogenomics societies, which contain therapeutic recommendations based on 
CYP2D6-predicted categories of metaboliser phenotype. Novel algorithms to 
interpret CYP2D6 function from sequencing data that consider structural 
variants, and machine learning approaches to characterise the functional impact 
of novel variants, are being developed. However, CYP2D6 genotyping is yet to be 
implemented broadly into clinical practice, and so further effort and 
initiatives are required to overcome the implementation challenges and deliver 
the potential benefits to the bedside.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11111295
PMCID: PMC7692531
PMID: 33143137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Christopher Taylor, Ian Crosby and Peter Maguire 
work with MC Diagnostics which operates as a commercial genetic testing kit 
manufacturer. The remaining authors have not conflict of interest to declare.


4. Clin Ther. 2018 Dec;40(12):1991-2004. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.07.012. Epub 
2018 Aug 17.

Pharmacovigilance: An Overview.

Beninger P(1).

Author information:
(1)Public Health and Community Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: paul.beninger@tufts.edu.

PURPOSE: Pharmacovigilance (PV) is a relatively new discipline in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Having undergone rapid growth over the past 2 decades, 
PV now touches many other disciplines in the research and development 
enterprise. With its growth has come a heightened awareness and interest in the 
medical community about the roles that PV plays. This article provides insights 
into the background and inner workings of PV.
METHODS: This narrative review covers the core PV activities and other major 
areas of the pharmaceutical enterprise in which PV makes significant 
contributions.
FINDINGS: Drug safety monitoring activities were organized by the US Food and 
Drug Administration and academic medical centers in the early 1950s in response 
to growing concern over the occurrence of aplastic anemia and other blood 
dyscrasias associated with the use of chloramphenicol. This experience was 
codified in the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug and 
Cosmetic Act as adverse event evaluation and reporting requirements. The ensuing 
decades have seen the development of core PV functions for pharmaceutical 
companies: case management, signal management, and benefit-risk management. A 
broader scope of PV has developed to include the following major activities: 
support of patient safety during the conduct of clinical trials through assuring 
proper use of informed consent and institutional review boards (ethics 
committees); selection of the first safe dose for use in humans, based on 
pharmacologic data obtained in animal studies; development of the safety profile 
for proper use of a new molecular entity and appropriate communication of that 
information to the range of relevant stakeholders; attendance to surveillance 
activities through a set of signal management processes; monitoring the 
manufactured product itself through collaborative activities with manufacturing 
professionals; management of benefit-risk to assure appropriate use in medical 
care after marketing; and maintenance of inspection readiness as a corporate 
cultural process.
IMPLICATIONS: The extent and pace of change promise to accelerate with the 
integration of biomedical informatics, analytics, artificial intelligence, and 
machine learning. This progress has implications for the development of the next 
generation of PV professionals who will need to be trained in entirely new skill 
sets to lead continued improvements in the safe use of pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.07.012
PMID: 30126707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Aug 12;19:4538-4558. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.08.011. eCollection 2021.

A review on machine learning approaches and trends in drug discovery.

Carracedo-Reboredo P(1), Liñares-Blanco J(1)(2), Rodríguez-Fernández N(2)(3), 
Cedrón F(1), Novoa FJ(1), Carballal A(1)(2)(3), Maojo V(4), Pazos A(1)(2)(5), 
Fernandez-Lozano C(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Faculty of 
Computer Science, Universidade da Coruna, Campus Elviña s/n, A Coruña 15071, 
Spain.
(2)CITIC-Research Center of Information and Communication Technologies, 
Universidade da Coruna, A Coruña 15071, Spain.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Information Technologies, Faculty of 
Communication Science, Universidade da Coruna, Campus Elviña s/n, A Coruña 
15071, Spain.
(4)Biomedical Informatics Group, Artificial Intelligence Department, Polytechnic 
University of Madrid, Calle de los Ciruelos, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid 28660, 
Spain.
(5)Grupo de Redes de Neuronas Artificiales y Sistemas Adaptativos. Imagen Médica 
y Diagnóstico Radiológico (RNASA-IMEDIR), Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de 
A Coruña (CHUAC), SERGAS, Universidade da Coruña, Instituto de Investigación 
Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), A Coruña, Spain.

Drug discovery aims at finding new compounds with specific chemical properties 
for the treatment of diseases. In the last years, the approach used in this 
search presents an important component in computer science with the skyrocketing 
of machine learning techniques due to its democratization. With the objectives 
set by the Precision Medicine initiative and the new challenges generated, it is 
necessary to establish robust, standard and reproducible computational 
methodologies to achieve the objectives set. Currently, predictive models based 
on Machine Learning have gained great importance in the step prior to 
preclinical studies. This stage manages to drastically reduce costs and research 
times in the discovery of new drugs. This review article focuses on how these 
new methodologies are being used in recent years of research. Analyzing the 
state of the art in this field will give us an idea of where cheminformatics 
will be developed in the short term, the limitations it presents and the 
positive results it has achieved. This review will focus mainly on the methods 
used to model the molecular data, as well as the biological problems addressed 
and the Machine Learning algorithms used for drug discovery in recent years.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.08.011
PMCID: PMC8387781
PMID: 34471498

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


6. Brief Bioinform. 2020 Sep 25;21(5):1609-1627. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbz087.

Deep learning for drug-drug interaction extraction from the literature: a 
review.

Zhang T(1), Leng J(1), Liu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Key Lab of Big Data Mining and 
Knowledge Management.

Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are crucial for drug research and 
pharmacovigilance. These interactions may cause adverse drug effects that 
threaten public health and patient safety. Therefore, the DDIs extraction from 
biomedical literature has been widely studied and emphasized in modern 
biomedical research. The previous rules-based and machine learning approaches 
rely on tedious feature engineering, which is labourious, time-consuming and 
unsatisfactory. With the development of deep learning technologies, this problem 
is alleviated by learning feature representations automatically. Here, we review 
the recent deep learning methods that have been applied to the extraction of 
DDIs from biomedical literature. We describe each method briefly and compare its 
performance in the DDI corpus systematically. Next, we summarize the advantages 
and disadvantages of these deep learning models for this task. Furthermore, we 
discuss some challenges and future perspectives of DDI extraction via deep 
learning methods. This review aims to serve as a useful guide for interested 
researchers to further advance bioinformatics algorithms for DDIs extraction 
from the literature.

© The authors 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Institute of Mathematics and its Applications. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbz087
PMID: 31686105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Jan 18;22(1):164-177. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbz140.

A survey on adverse drug reaction studies: data, tasks and machine learning 
methods.

Nguyen DA(1), Nguyen CH(2), Mamitsuka H(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Center in Kyoto University.
(2)Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University.

MOTIVATION: Adverse drug reaction (ADR) or drug side effect studies play a 
crucial role in drug discovery. Recently, with the rapid increase of both 
clinical and non-clinical data, machine learning methods have emerged as 
prominent tools to support analyzing and predicting ADRs. Nonetheless, there are 
still remaining challenges in ADR studies.
RESULTS: In this paper, we summarized ADR data sources and review ADR studies in 
three tasks: drug-ADR benchmark data creation, drug-ADR prediction and ADR 
mechanism analysis. We focused on machine learning methods used in each task and 
then compare performances of the methods on the drug-ADR prediction task. 
Finally, we discussed open problems for further ADR studies.
AVAILABILITY: Data and code are available at 
https://github.com/anhnda/ADRPModels.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbz140
PMID: 31838499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Mar 5;18(5):2600. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18052600.

Multi-Drug Featurization and Deep Learning Improve Patient-Specific Predictions 
of Adverse Events.

Anastopoulos IN(1)(2), Herczeg CK(2), Davis KN(2), Dixit AC(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, 
USA.
(2)Coral Genomics, Inc., 953 Indiana St., San Francisco, CA 94107, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Apr 01;19(7):

While the clinical approval process is able to filter out medications whose 
utility does not offset their adverse drug reaction profile in humans, it is not 
well suited to characterizing lower frequency issues and idiosyncratic 
multi-drug interactions that can happen in real world diverse patient 
populations. With a growing abundance of real-world evidence databases 
containing hundreds of thousands of patient records, it is now feasible to build 
machine learning models that incorporate individual patient information to 
provide personalized adverse event predictions. In this study, we build models 
that integrate patient specific demographic, clinical, and genetic features 
(when available) with drug structure to predict adverse drug reactions. We 
develop an extensible graph convolutional approach to be able to integrate 
molecular effects from the variable number of medications a typical patient may 
be taking. Our model outperforms standard machine learning methods at the tasks 
of predicting hospitalization and death in the UK Biobank dataset yielding an R2 
of 0.37 and an AUC of 0.90, respectively. We believe our model has potential for 
evaluating new therapeutic compounds for individualized toxicities in real world 
diverse populations. It can also be used to prioritize medications when there 
are multiple options being considered for treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18052600
PMCID: PMC7967515
PMID: 33807714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.D. and K.D. are equity holders in Coral 
Genomics, Inc.


9. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Mar 22;22(2):1884-1901. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa040.

Prediction of drug adverse events using deep learning in pharmaceutical 
discovery.

Lee CY(1), Chen YP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe 
University.

Traditional machine learning methods used to detect the side effects of drugs 
pose significant challenges as feature engineering processes are 
labor-intensive, expert-dependent, time-consuming and cost-ineffective. 
Moreover, these methods only focus on detecting the association between drugs 
and their side effects or classifying drug-drug interaction. Motivated by 
technological advancements and the availability of big data, we provide a review 
on the detection and classification of side effects using deep learning 
approaches. It is shown that the effective integration of heterogeneous, 
multidimensional drug data sources, together with the innovative deployment of 
deep learning approaches, helps reduce or prevent the occurrence of adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs). Deep learning approaches can also be exploited to find 
replacements for drugs which have side effects or help to diversify the 
utilization of drugs through drug repurposing.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbaa040
PMID: 32349125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2020 Aug;25(4):435-441. doi: 
10.1097/MOT.0000000000000770.

Artificial neural network and bioavailability of the immunosuppression drug.

Naushad SM(1), Kutala VK(2).

Author information:
(1)Sandor Speciality Diagnostics Pvt Ltd.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Nizam's Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The success of organ transplant is determined by number of 
demographic, clinical, immunological and genetic variables. Artificial 
intelligence tools, such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) or classification 
and regression trees (CART) can handle multiple independent variables and 
predict the dependent variables by deducing the complex nonlinear relationships 
between variables.
RECENT FINDINGS: In the last two decades, several researchers employed these 
tools to identify donor-recipient matching pairs, to optimize immunosuppressant 
doses, to predict allograft survival and to minimize adverse drug reactions. 
These models showed better performance characteristics than the empirical dosing 
strategies in terms of sensitivity, specificity, overall accuracy, or area under 
the curve of receiver-operating characteristic curves. The performance of the 
models was dependent directly on the input variables. Recent studies identified 
protein biomarkers and pharmacogenetic determinants of immunosuppressants as 
additional variables that increase the precision in prediction. Accessibility of 
medical records, proper follow-up of transplant cases, deep understanding of 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic pathways of immunosuppressant drugs coupled 
with genomic and proteomic markers are essential in developing an effective 
artificial intelligence platform for transplantation.
SUMMARY: Artificial intelligence has a greater clinical utility both in 
pretransplantation and posttransplantation periods to get favourable clinical 
outcomes, thus ensuring successful graft survival.

DOI: 10.1097/MOT.0000000000000770
PMID: 32452906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Yearb Med Inform. 2020 Aug;29(1):203-207. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1702007. Epub 2020 
Aug 21.

Clinical Research Informatics.

Daniel C(1)(2), Kalra D(3); Section Editors for the IMIA Yearbook Section on 
Clinical Research Informatics.

Author information:
(1)Information Technology Department, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne University, University Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, INSERM UMR_S 
1142, LIMICS, Paris, France.
(3)The University of Gent, Gent, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: To summarize key contributions to current research in the field of 
Clinical Research Informatics (CRI) and to select best papers published in 2019.
METHOD: A bibliographic search using a combination of MeSH descriptors and 
free-text terms on CRI was performed using PubMed, followed by a double-blind 
review in order to select a list of candidate best papers to be then 
peer-reviewed by external reviewers. After peer-review ranking, a consensus 
meeting between the two section editors and the editorial team was organized to 
finally conclude on the selected three best papers.
RESULTS: Among the 517 papers, published in 2019, returned by the search, that 
were in the scope of the various areas of CRI, the full review process selected 
three best papers. The first best paper describes the use of a homomorphic 
encryption technique to enable federated analysis of real-world data while 
complying more easily with data protection requirements. The authors of the 
second best paper demonstrate the evidence value of federated data networks 
reporting a large real world data study related to the first line treatment for 
hypertension. The third best paper reports the migration of the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) adverse event reporting system database to the OMOP common 
data model. This work opens the combined analysis of both spontaneous reporting 
system and electronic health record (EHR) data for pharmacovigilance.
CONCLUSIONS: The most significant research efforts in the CRI field are 
currently focusing on real world evidence generation and especially the reuse of 
EHR data. With the progress achieved this year in the areas of phenotyping, data 
integration, semantic interoperability, and data quality assessment, real world 
data is becoming more accessible and reusable. High quality data sets are key 
assets not only for large scale observational studies or for changing the way 
clinical trials are conducted but also for developing or evaluating artificial 
intelligence algorithms guiding clinical decision for more personalized care. 
And lastly, security and confidentiality, ethical and regulatory issues, and 
more generally speaking data governance are still active research areas this 
year.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1702007
PMCID: PMC7442510
PMID: 32823317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


12. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2019 Apr;144(7):447-451. doi: 10.1055/a-0740-8631. Epub 
2019 Mar 29.

[Digital Cardiology].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Meder B(1)(2)(3)(4), Radke P(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Cardiomyopathien Heidelberg (ICH.), Universität Heidelberg.
(2)Informatics for Life, Department of Medicine III, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Germany.
(4)Department of Genetics Stanford University, Stanford, USA.
(5)Klinik für Innere Medizin und Kardiologie, Schön Klinik Neustadt.

The increase in life expectancy and Healthy Life Years in Europe is largely 
attributable to the success of cardiovascular medicine. Technical developments 
enable ever more detailed insights into disease processes and enable a precise, 
multimodal diagnosis of even complex diseases using digital imaging, cardiac 
biomarkers and genomic information. The rapid availability of this data, often 
in real time, allows optimized planning and performing of tailored 
interventional, surgical, or pharmacotherapies. But there are also completely 
new challenges due to the growing flood of data, the integration of which can no 
longer be achieved by the individual doctor. The active involvement and 
participation of the patient also requires new digital concepts and should 
include decision-making, treatment planning, (long-term) history, and feedback 
on success and adverse drug reactions. By using artificial intelligence, digital 
communication and decision support systems, economic benefits, quality 
improvements and acceleration of outpatient and inpatient treatment become 
possible.The DGK supports these developments in its own activities, both in 
project planning, communication with specialist groups, and in training and 
education. In this article you will find excerpts from current developments of 
digital cardiology.

Publisher: AKTUELLE ENTWICKLUNGEN DER MODERNEN MEDIZIN: Künstliche Intelligenz, 
Big Data und mobile Sensorik transformieren derzeit die Kardiologie. 
Fortschrittliche digitale Konzepte spielen in vielen Bereichen der Kardiologie 
eine immer wichtigere Rolle und werden sich schnell als Partner von Arzt und 
Patient etablieren können. BIG DATA UND KüNSTLICHE INTELLIGENZ:  Künstliche 
Intelligenz (KI) hält Einzug in den digitalen Arztalltag und ist keine 
Science-Fiction mehr. Spezielle Algorithmen kommen heute bereits im Rahmen 
diagnostischer Prozesse zum Einsatz und bieten großes Potenzial für die Zukunft.
SMARTPHONES, APPS UND CO: Smartphones und Wearables können über die Anwendung 
von speziellen Apps im Bereich der Kardiologie eingesetzt werden. Die neue DSGVO 
erschwert die Entwicklung neuer Kommunikationskanäle unter Ärzten und zwischen 
Ärzten und Patienten. Neue Apps, Messenger und Verschlüsselungssysteme sollen 
die Sicherheit der sensiblen Daten gewährleisten.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0740-8631
PMID: 30925598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B. Meder ist Mitglied des wissenschaftlichen 
Beirats der Firma Fleischhacker GmBH, welche KIS Lösungen entwickelt.


13. Front Genet. 2021 Jan 12;11:625659. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.625659. eCollection 
2020.

Adverse Drug Reaction Discovery Using a Tumor-Biomarker Knowledge Graph.

Wang M(1), Ma X(1), Si J(2), Tang H(3), Wang H(4), Li T(3), Ouyang W(3), Gong 
L(5), Tang Y(3), He X(3), Huang W(6), Liu X(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(4)College of Design and Innovation, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are a major public health concern, and early 
detection is crucial for drug development and patient safety. Together with the 
increasing availability of large-scale literature data, machine learning has the 
potential to predict unknown ADRs from current knowledge. By the machine 
learning methods, we constructed a Tumor-Biomarker Knowledge Graph (TBKG) which 
contains four types of node: Tumor, Biomarker, Drug, and ADR using biomedical 
literatures. Based on this knowledge graph, we not only discovered potential 
ADRs of antitumor drugs but also provided explanations. Experiments on 
real-world data show that our model can achieve 0.81 accuracy of three 
cross-validation and the ADRs discovery of Osimertinib was chosen for the 
clinical validation. Calculated ADRs of Osimertinib by our model consisted of 
the known ADRs which were in line with the official manual and some unreported 
rare ADRs in clinical cases. Results also showed that our model outperformed 
traditional co-occurrence methods. Moreover, each calculated ADRs were attached 
with the corresponding paths of "tumor-biomarker-drug" in the knowledge graph 
which could help to obtain in-depth insights into the underlying mechanisms. In 
conclusion, the tumor-biomarker knowledge-graph based approach is an explainable 
method for potential ADRs discovery based on biomarkers and might be valuable to 
the community working on the emerging field of biomedical literature mining and 
provide impetus for the mechanism research of ADRs.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Ma, Si, Tang, Wang, Li, Ouyang, Gong, Tang, He, Huang and 
Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.625659
PMCID: PMC7873847
PMID: 33584816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


14. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 2;11(1):17619. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97193-8.

A machine learning framework for predicting drug-drug interactions.

Mei S(1), Zhang K(2).

Author information:
(1)Software College, Shenyang Normal University, Shenyang, 110034, China. 
meisygle@gmail.com.
(2)Bioinformatics Core of Xavier RCMI Center for Cancer Research, Department of 
Computer Science, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 70125, USA. 
kzhang@xula.edu.

Understanding drug-drug interactions is an essential step to reduce the risk of 
adverse drug events before clinical drug co-prescription. Existing methods, 
commonly integrating heterogeneous data to increase model performance, often 
suffer from a high model complexity, As such, how to elucidate the molecular 
mechanisms underlying drug-drug interactions while preserving rational 
biological interpretability is a challenging task in computational modeling for 
drug discovery. In this study, we attempt to investigate drug-drug interactions 
via the associations between genes that two drugs target. For this purpose, we 
propose a simple f drug target profile representation to depict drugs and drug 
pairs, from which an l2-regularized logistic regression model is built to 
predict drug-drug interactions. Furthermore, we define several statistical 
metrics in the context of human protein-protein interaction networks and 
signaling pathways to measure the interaction intensity, interaction efficacy 
and action range between two drugs. Large-scale empirical studies including both 
cross validation and independent test show that the proposed drug target 
profiles-based machine learning framework outperforms existing data 
integration-based methods. The proposed statistical metrics show that two drugs 
easily interact in the cases that they target common genes; or their target 
genes connect via short paths in protein-protein interaction networks; or their 
target genes are located at signaling pathways that have cross-talks. The 
unravelled mechanisms could provide biological insights into potential adverse 
drug reactions of co-prescribed drugs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-97193-8
PMCID: PMC8413337
PMID: 34475500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


15. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2021 Feb;19(1):2050046. doi: 10.1142/S0219720020500468. 
Epub 2021 Jan 20.

Prediction of adverse drug reactions using drug convolutional neural networks.

Mantripragada AS(1), Teja SP(1), Katasani RR(1), Joshi P(1), V M(1), Ramesh 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIITDM Kancheepuram, Chennai 
600127, India.
(2)Data Foundry, Bangalore, India.

Prediction of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) has been an important aspect of 
Pharmacovigilance because of its impact in the pharma industry. The standard 
process of introduction of a new drug into a market involves a lot of clinical 
trials and tests. This is a tedious and time consuming process and also involves 
a lot of monetary resources. The faster approval of a drug helps the patients 
who are in need of the drug. The in silico prediction of Adverse Drug Reactions 
can help speed up the aforementioned process. The challenges involved are lack 
of negative data present and predicting ADR from just the chemical structure. 
Although many models are already available to predict ADR, most of the models 
use biological activities identifiers, chemical and physical properties in 
addition to chemical structures of the drugs. But for most of the new drugs to 
be tested, only chemical structures will be available. The performance of the 
existing models predicting ADR only using chemical structures is not efficient. 
Therefore, an efficient prediction of ADRs from just the chemical structure has 
been proposed in this paper. The proposed method involves a separate model for 
each ADR, making it a binary classification problem. This paper presents a novel 
CNN model called Drug Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) to predict ADRs using 
chemical structures of the drugs. The performance is measured using the metrics 
such as Accuracy, Recall, Precision, Specificity, F1 score, AUROC and MCC. The 
results obtained by the proposed DCNN model outperform the competing models on 
the SIDER4.1 database in terms of all the metrics. A case study has been 
performed on a COVID-19 recommended drugs, where the proposed model predicted 
the ADRs that are well aligned with the observations made by medical 
professionals using conventional methods.

DOI: 10.1142/S0219720020500468
PMID: 33472571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Int J Med Inform. 2021 Dec;156:104611. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2021.104611. Epub 
2021 Oct 5.

Automation of penicillin adverse drug reaction categorisation and risk 
stratification with machine learning natural language processing.

Inglis JM(1), Bacchi S(2), Troelnikov A(3), Smith W(3), Shakib S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia; Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. 
Electronic address: joshua.m.inglis@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia; Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Clinical Immunology & Allergy, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia; Discipline of Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The penicillin adverse drug reaction (ADR) label is common in 
electronic health records (EHRs). However, there is significant 
misclassification between allergy and intolerance within the EHR and most 
patients can be delabelled after an immunologic assessment. Machine learning 
natural language processing may be able to assist with the categorisation and 
risk stratification of penicillin ADRs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to use text entered into an EHR to derive 
and evaluate machine learning models to classify penicillin ADRs and assess the 
risk of true allergy.
METHODS: Machine learning natural language processing was applied to free-text 
penicillin ADR data extracted from a public health system EHR. The model was 
developed by training on labelled dataset. ADR entries were split into training 
and testing datasets and used to develop and test a variety of machine learning 
models. These were compared to categorisation with a simple algorithm using 
keyword search.
RESULTS: The best performing model for the classification of penicillin ADRs as 
being consistent with allergy or intolerance was the artificial neural network 
(AUC 0.994, sensitivity 0.99, specificity 0.96). The artificial neural network 
also achieved the highest AUC in the classification of high- or low-risk of true 
allergy (AUC 0.988, sensitivity 0.99, specificity 0.99). All ADR labels were 
able to be classified using these machine learning models, whereas a small 
proportion were unclassifiable using the simple algorithm as they contained no 
keywords.
CONCLUSION: Machine learning natural language processing performed similarly to 
expert criteria in classifying and risk stratifying penicillin ADRs labels. 
These models outperformed simpler algorithms in their ability to interpret 
free-text data contained in the EHR. The automated evaluation of penicillin ADR 
labels may allow real-time risk stratification to facilitate delabelling and 
improve the specificity of prescribing alerts.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2021.104611
PMID: 34653809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Nov 5;22(6):bbab293. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab293.

Machine learning approaches for drug combination therapies.

Güvenç Paltun B(1)(2), Kaski S(1)(2)(3), Mamitsuka H(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.
(2)Helsinki Institute for Information Technology (HIIT), Finland.
(3)University of Manchester, UK.
(4)Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji 
6110011, Japan.

Drug combination therapy is a promising strategy to treat complex diseases such 
as cancer and infectious diseases. However, current knowledge of drug 
combination therapies, especially in cancer patients, is limited because of 
adverse drug effects, toxicity and cell line heterogeneity. Screening new drug 
combinations requires substantial efforts since considering all possible 
combinations between drugs is infeasible and expensive. Therefore, building 
computational approaches, particularly machine learning methods, could provide 
an effective strategy to overcome drug resistance and improve therapeutic 
efficacy. In this review, we group the state-of-the-art machine learning 
approaches to analyze personalized drug combination therapies into three 
categories and discuss each method in each category. We also present a short 
description of relevant databases used as a benchmark in drug combination 
therapies and provide a list of well-known, publicly available interactive data 
analysis portals. We highlight the importance of data integration on the 
identification of drug combinations. Finally, we address the advantages of 
combining multiple data sources on drug combination analysis by showing an 
experimental comparison.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab293
PMCID: PMC8574999
PMID: 34368832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Adv Nurs. 2021 Jul;77(7):3168-3175. doi: 10.1111/jan.14779. Epub 2021 Feb 23.

Root causes of adverse drug events in hospitals and artificial intelligence 
capabilities for prevention.

Gordo C(1), Núñez-Córdoba JM(2)(3), Mateo R(4).

Author information:
(1)Healthcare Quality Service, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Research Support Service, Central Clinical Trials Unit, Clínica Universidad 
de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine, 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(4)Department of Business, School of Economics and Business, University of 
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

AIMS: To identify and prioritize the root causes of adverse drug events (ADEs) 
in hospitals and to assess the ability of artificial intelligence (AI) 
capabilities to prevent ADEs.
DESIGN: A mixed method design was used.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study for hospitals in Spain was carried out between 
February and April 2019 to identify and prioritize the root causes of ADEs. A 
nominal group technique was also used to assess the ability of AI capabilities 
to prevent ADEs.
RESULTS: The main root cause of ADEs was a lack of adherence to safety protocols 
(64.8%), followed by identification errors (57.4%), and fragile and 
polymedicated patients (44.4%). An analysis of the AI capabilities to prevent 
the root causes of ADEs showed that identification and reading are two 
potentially useful capabilities.
CONCLUSION: Identification error is one of the main root causes of drug adverse 
events and AI capabilities could potentially prevent drug adverse events.
IMPACT: This study highlights the role of AI capabilities in safely identifying 
both patients and drugs, which is a crucial part of the medication 
administration process, and how this can prevent ADEs in hospitals.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14779
PMID: 33624324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22(23):3498-526. doi: 10.2174/1381612822666160509125047.

Data-driven Approach to Detect and Predict Adverse Drug Reactions.

Ho TB(1), Le L, Thai DT, Taewijit S.

Author information:
(1)School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Japan. bao@jaist.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Many factors that directly or indirectly cause adverse drug reaction 
(ADRs) varying from pharmacological, immunological and genetic factors to 
ethnic, age, gender, social factors as well as drug and disease related ones. On 
the other hand, advanced methods of statistics, machine learning and data mining 
allow the users to more effectively analyze the data for descriptive and 
predictive purposes. The fast changes in this field make it difficult to follow 
the research progress and context on ADR detection and prediction.
METHODS: A large amount of articles on ADRs in the last twenty years is 
collected. These articles are grouped by recent data types used to study ADRs: 
omics, social media and electronic medical records (EMRs), and reviewed in terms 
of the problem addressed, the datasets used and methods.
RESULTS: Corresponding three tables are established providing brief information 
on the research for ADRs detection and prediction.
CONCLUSION: The data-driven approach has shown to be powerful in ADRs detection 
and prediction. The review helps researchers and pharmacists to have a quick 
overview on the current status of ADRs detection and prediction.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612822666160509125047
PMID: 27157416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Curr Comput Aided Drug Des. 2019;15(2):111-119. doi: 
10.2174/1573409914666180525124608.

The Application of Machine Learning Techniques in Clinical Drug Therapy.

Meng HY(1), Jin WL(1), Yan CK(1), Yang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

INTRODUCTION: The development of a novel drug is an extremely complicated 
process that includes the target identification, design and manufacture, and 
proper therapy of the novel drug, as well as drug dose selection, drug efficacy 
evaluation, and adverse drug reaction control. Due to the limited resources, 
high costs, long duration, and low hit-to-lead ratio in the development of 
pharmacogenetics and computer technology, machine learning techniques have 
assisted novel drug development and have gradually received more attention by 
researchers.
METHODS: According to current research, machine learning techniques are widely 
applied in the process of the discovery of new drugs and novel drug targets, the 
decision surrounding proper therapy and drug dose, and the prediction of drug 
efficacy and adverse drug reactions.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: In this article, we discussed the history, workflow, and 
advantages and disadvantages of machine learning techniques in the processes 
mentioned above. Although the advantages of machine learning techniques are 
fairly obvious, the application of machine learning techniques is currently 
limited. With further research, the application of machine techniques in drug 
development could be much more widespread and could potentially be one of the 
major methods used in drug development.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573409914666180525124608
PMID: 29804538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Emerg Top Life Sci. 2021 May 14;5(1):13-27. doi: 10.1042/ETLS20200253.

Remodelling structure-based drug design using machine learning.

Dutta S(1), Bose K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer (ACTREC), 
Tata Memorial Centre, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai 410210, India.
(2)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushaktinagar, 
Mumbai 400094, India.

To keep up with the pace of rapid discoveries in biomedicine, a plethora of 
research endeavors had been directed toward Rational Drug Development that 
slowly gave way to Structure-Based Drug Design (SBDD). In the past few decades, 
SBDD played a stupendous role in identification of novel drug-like molecules 
that are capable of altering the structures and/or functions of the target 
macromolecules involved in different disease pathways and networks. 
Unfortunately, post-delivery drug failures due to adverse drug interactions have 
constrained the use of SBDD in biomedical applications. However, recent 
technological advancements, along with parallel surge in clinical research have 
led to the concomitant establishment of other powerful computational techniques 
such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML). These 
leading-edge tools with the ability to successfully predict side-effects of a 
wide range of drugs have eventually taken over the field of drug design. ML, a 
subset of AI, is a robust computational tool that is capable of data analysis 
and analytical model building with minimal human intervention. It is based on 
powerful algorithms that use huge sets of 'training data' as inputs to predict 
new output values, which improve iteratively through experience. In this review, 
along with a brief discussion on the evolution of the drug discovery process, we 
have focused on the methodologies pertaining to the technological advancements 
of machine learning. This review, with specific examples, also emphasises the 
tremendous contributions of ML in the field of biomedicine, while exploring 
possibilities for future developments.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society and the Royal Society of Biology.

DOI: 10.1042/ETLS20200253
PMID: 33825834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 May 1;115(18):E4304-E4311. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1803294115. Epub 2018 Apr 16.

Deep learning improves prediction of drug-drug and drug-food interactions.

Ryu JY(1), Kim HU(1)(2), Lee SY(3)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic and Biomolecular Engineering National Research Laboratory, 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 Plus Program), 
Institute for the BioCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST), 34141 Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)BioInformatics Research Center, KAIST, 34141 Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Metabolic and Biomolecular Engineering National Research Laboratory, 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 Plus Program), 
Institute for the BioCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST), 34141 Daejeon, Republic of Korea; leesy@kaist.ac.kr.
(4)BioProcess Engineering Research Center, KAIST, 34141 Daejeon, Republic of 
Korea.

Drug interactions, including drug-drug interactions (DDIs) and drug-food 
constituent interactions (DFIs), can trigger unexpected pharmacological effects, 
including adverse drug events (ADEs), with causal mechanisms often unknown. 
Several computational methods have been developed to better understand drug 
interactions, especially for DDIs. However, these methods do not provide 
sufficient details beyond the chance of DDI occurrence, or require detailed drug 
information often unavailable for DDI prediction. Here, we report development of 
a computational framework DeepDDI that uses names of drug-drug or drug-food 
constituent pairs and their structural information as inputs to accurately 
generate 86 important DDI types as outputs of human-readable sentences. DeepDDI 
uses deep neural network with its optimized prediction performance and predicts 
86 DDI types with a mean accuracy of 92.4% using the DrugBank gold standard DDI 
dataset covering 192,284 DDIs contributed by 191,878 drug pairs. DeepDDI is used 
to suggest potential causal mechanisms for the reported ADEs of 9,284 drug 
pairs, and also predict alternative drug candidates for 62,707 drug pairs having 
negative health effects. Furthermore, DeepDDI is applied to 3,288,157 drug-food 
constituent pairs (2,159 approved drugs and 1,523 well-characterized food 
constituents) to predict DFIs. The effects of 256 food constituents on 
pharmacological effects of interacting drugs and bioactivities of 149 food 
constituents are predicted. These results suggest that DeepDDI can provide 
important information on drug prescription and even dietary suggestions while 
taking certain drugs and also guidelines during drug development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1803294115
PMCID: PMC5939113
PMID: 29666228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors and 
sponsor declare the technology described here is patent filed 
(KR-10-2017-0164115) for potential commercialization.


23. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Jul 6;13(7):1026. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13071026.

Machine Learning Uncovers Adverse Drug Effects on Intestinal Bacteria.

McCoubrey LE(1), Elbadawi M(1), Orlu M(1), Gaisford S(1), Basit AW(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL School of Pharmacy, University College London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, 
London WC1N 1AX, UK.

The human gut microbiome, composed of trillions of microorganisms, plays an 
essential role in human health. Many factors shape gut microbiome composition 
over the life span, including changes to diet, lifestyle, and medication use. 
Though not routinely tested during drug development, drugs can exert profound 
effects on the gut microbiome, potentially altering its functions and promoting 
disease. This study develops a machine learning (ML) model to predict whether 
drugs will impair the growth of 40 gut bacterial strains. Trained on over 18,600 
drug-bacteria interactions, 13 distinct ML models are built and compared, 
including tree-based, ensemble, and artificial neural network techniques. 
Following hyperparameter tuning and multi-metric evaluation, a lead ML model is 
selected: a tuned extra trees algorithm with performances of AUROC: 0.857 
(±0.014), recall: 0.587 (±0.063), precision: 0.800 (±0.053), and f1: 0.666 
(±0.042). This model can be used by the pharmaceutical industry during drug 
development and could even be adapted for use in clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13071026
PMCID: PMC8308984
PMID: 34371718

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


24. Proc ACM Conf Health Inference Learn (2020). 2020 Apr;2020:30-39. doi: 
10.1145/3368555.3384459.

Adverse Drug Reaction Discovery from Electronic Health Records with Deep Neural 
Networks.

Zhang W(1), Peissig P(2), Kuang Z(3), Page D(4).

Author information:
(1)Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(2)Biomedical Informatics Research Center, Marshfield Clinic Research Institute.
(3)Computer Science Department, Stanford University.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are detrimental and unexpected clinical incidents 
caused by drug intake. The increasing availability of massive quantities of 
longitudinal event data such as electronic health records (EHRs) has redefined 
ADR discovery as a big data analytics problem, where data-hungry deep neural 
networks are especially suitable because of the abundance of the data. To this 
end, we introduce neural self-controlled case series (NSCCS), a deep learning 
framework for ADR discovery from EHRs. NSCCS rigorously follows a 
self-controlled case series design to adjust implicitly and efficiently for 
individual heterogeneity. In this way, NSCCS is robust to time-invariant 
confounding issues and thus more capable of identifying associations that 
reflect the underlying mechanism between various types of drugs and adverse 
conditions. We apply NSCCS to a large-scale, real-world EHR dataset and 
empirically demonstrate its superior performance with comprehensive experiments 
on a benchmark ADR discovery task.

DOI: 10.1145/3368555.3384459
PMCID: PMC7718770
PMID: 33283213


25. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1939:231-252. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9089-4_13.

Text Mining for Drug Discovery.

Zheng S(1), Dharssi S(2), Wu M(1), Li J(1), Lu Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Information and Library, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA. 
Zhiyong.Lu@nih.gov.

Recent advances in technology have led to the exponential growth of scientific 
literature in biomedical sciences. This rapid increase in information has 
surpassed the threshold for manual curation efforts, necessitating the use of 
text mining approaches in the field of life sciences. One such application of 
text mining is in fostering in silico drug discovery such as drug target 
screening, pharmacogenomics, adverse drug event detection, etc. This chapter 
serves as an introduction to the applications of various text mining approaches 
in drug discovery. It is divided into two parts with the first half as an 
overview of text mining in the biosciences. The second half of the chapter 
reviews strategies and methods for four unique applications of text mining in 
drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9089-4_13
PMID: 30848465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Apr 30;12:651720. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.651720. 
eCollection 2021.

Role of Pharmacogenetics in Adverse Drug Reactions: An Update towards 
Personalized Medicine.

Micaglio E(1), Locati ET(1), Monasky MM(1), Romani F(1)(2), Heilbron F(3), 
Pappone C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Arrhythmology and Electrophysiology Department, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, (Vita-Salute University) for Federico 
Romani, Milan, Italy.
(3)Milano Bicocca University, Istituto Auxologico, Milan, Italy.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are an important and frequent cause of morbidity 
and mortality. ADR can be related to a variety of drugs, including 
anticonvulsants, anaesthetics, antibiotics, antiretroviral, anticancer, and 
antiarrhythmics, and can involve every organ or apparatus. The causes of ADRs 
are still poorly understood due to their clinical heterogeneity and complexity. 
In this scenario, genetic predisposition toward ADRs is an emerging issue, not 
only in anticancer chemotherapy, but also in many other fields of medicine, 
including hemolytic anemia due to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency, aplastic anemia, porphyria, malignant hyperthermia, epidermal tissue 
necrosis (Lyell's Syndrome and Stevens-Johnson Syndrome), epilepsy, thyroid 
diseases, diabetes, Long QT and Brugada Syndromes. The role of genetic mutations 
in the ADRs pathogenesis has been shown either for dose-dependent or for 
dose-independent reactions. In this review, we present an update of the genetic 
background of ADRs, with phenotypic manifestations involving blood, muscles, 
heart, thyroid, liver, and skin disorders. This review aims to illustrate the 
growing usefulness of genetics both to prevent ADRs and to optimize the safe 
therapeutic use of many common drugs. In this prospective, ADRs could become an 
untoward "stress test," leading to new diagnosis of genetic-determined diseases. 
Thus, the wider use of pharmacogenetic testing in the work-up of ADRs will lead 
to new clinical diagnosis of previously unsuspected diseases and to improved 
safety and efficacy of therapies. Improving the genotype-phenotype correlation 
through new lab techniques and implementation of artificial intelligence in the 
future may lead to personalized medicine, able to predict ADR and consequently 
to choose the appropriate compound and dosage for each patient.

Copyright © 2021 Micaglio, Locati, Monasky, Romani, Heilbron and Pappone.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.651720
PMCID: PMC8120428
PMID: 33995067

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


27. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Dec 9;12:799712. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.799712. 
eCollection 2021.

Bioinformatics Research on Drug Sensitivity Prediction.

Chen Y(1), Juan L(2), Lv X(3), Shi L(4).

Author information:
(1)Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Quzhou), University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Quzhou, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, China.
(3)Beidahuang Industry Group General Hospital, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Spine Surgery Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical University, 
Shanghai, China.

Modeling-based anti-cancer drug sensitivity prediction has been extensively 
studied in recent years. While most drug sensitivity prediction models only use 
gene expression data, the remarkable impacts of gene mutation, methylation, and 
copy number variation on drug sensitivity are neglected. Drug sensitivity 
prediction can both help protect patients from some adverse drug reactions and 
improve the efficacy of treatment. Genomics data are extremely useful for drug 
sensitivity prediction task. This article reviews the role of drug sensitivity 
prediction, describes a variety of methods for predicting drug sensitivity. 
Moreover, the research significance of drug sensitivity prediction, as well as 
existing problems are well discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Juan, Lv and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.799712
PMCID: PMC8696280
PMID: 34955863

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


28. Cell J. 2020 Oct;22(3):319-324. doi: 10.22074/cellj.2020.6615. Epub 2019 Dec 15.

Adverse Drug Reaction Detection in Social Media by Deepm Learning Methods.

Rezaei Z(1), Ebrahimpour-Komleh H(2), Eslami B(3), Chavoshinejad R(4), Totonchi 
M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering, University of Kashan, 
Kashan, Iran. Electronic Address: z.rezaei2010@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering, University of Kashan, 
Kashan, Iran. Electronic Address: ebrahimpour@kashanu.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Computer Engineering, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Mabna Veterinary Lab, Karaj, Alborz, Iran.
(5)Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan 
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research 
Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, 
Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Health-related studies have been recently at the heart attention of 
the media. Social media, such as Twitter, has become a valuable online tool to 
describe the early detection of various adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Different 
medications have adverse effects on various cells and tissues, sometimes more 
than one cell population would be adversely affected. These types of side effect 
are occasionally associated with the direct or indirect influence of prescribed 
drugs but do not have general unfavorable mutagenic consequences on patients. 
This study aimed to demonstrate a quick and accurate method to collect and 
classify information based on the distribution of approved data on Twitter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this classification method, we selected "ask a 
patient" dataset and combination of Twitter "Ask a Patient" datasets that 
comprised of 6,623, 26,934, and 11,623 reviews. We used deep learning methods 
with the word2vec to classify ADR comments posted by the users and present an 
architecture by HAN, FastText, and CNN.
RESULTS: Natural language processing (NLP) deep learning is able to address more 
advanced peculiarity in learning information compared to other types of machine 
learning. Moreover, the current study highlighted the advantage of incorporating 
various semantic features, including topics and concepts.
CONCLUSION: Our approach predicts drug safety with the accuracy of 93% (the 
combination of Twitter and "Ask a Patient" datasets) in a binary manner. Despite 
the apparent benefit of various conventional classifiers, deep learningbased 
text classification methods seem to be precise and influential tools to detect 
ADR.

Copyright© by Royan Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.22074/cellj.2020.6615
PMCID: PMC6947008
PMID: 31863657

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest in this study.


29. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 Dec 23;20(Suppl 21):707. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-019-3195-5.

Machine learning-based identification and rule-based normalization of adverse 
drug reactions in drug labels.

Tiftikci M(1), Özgür A(1), He Y(2), Hur J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, Boğaziçi University, İstanbul, 34342, 
Turkey.
(2)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 48109, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Dakota School of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, 1301 North Columbia Rd, Grand Forks, North Dakota, 
58202, USA. junguk.hur@med.und.edu.

BACKGROUND: Use of medication can cause adverse drug reactions (ADRs), unwanted 
or unexpected events, which are a major safety concern. Drug labels, or 
prescribing information or package inserts, describe ADRs. Therefore, 
systematically identifying ADR information from drug labels is critical in 
multiple aspects; however, this task is challenging due to the nature of the 
natural language of drug labels.
RESULTS: In this paper, we present a machine learning- and rule-based system for 
the identification of ADR entity mentions in the text of drug labels and their 
normalization through the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) 
dictionary. The machine learning approach is based on a recently proposed deep 
learning architecture, which integrates bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory 
(Bi-LSTM), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), and Conditional Random Fields 
(CRF) for entity recognition. The rule-based approach, used for normalizing the 
identified ADR mentions to MedDRA terms, is based on an extension of our 
in-house text-mining system, SciMiner. We evaluated our system on the Text 
Analysis Conference (TAC) Adverse Drug Reaction 2017 challenge test data set, 
consisting of 200 manually curated US FDA drug labels. Our ML-based system 
achieved 77.0% F1 score on the task of ADR mention recognition and 82.6% 
micro-averaged F1 score on the task of ADR normalization, while rule-based 
system achieved 67.4 and 77.6% F1 scores, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that a system composed of a deep learning 
architecture for entity recognition and a rule-based model for entity 
normalization is a promising approach for ADR extraction from drug labels.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-3195-5
PMCID: PMC6927101
PMID: 31865904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


30. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):403-405. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01177-0. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Safe Medicines.

Bate A(1)(2)(3), Luo Y(4).

Author information:
(1)GSK, Brentford, UK. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(2)LSHTM, London, UK. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(3)New York University, New York, NY, USA. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(4)Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

Authors' views on the role of artificial intelligence and machine learning in 
pharmacovigilance. (MP4  139807 kb).

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01177-0
PMCID: PMC9112276
PMID: 35579805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Andrew Bate is an employee of GSK and holds 
stock and stock options. Yuan Luo has received grants from the National 
Institutes of Health (U01TR003528 and R01LM013337) and has no other disclosures 
to report.


31. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Jul 28;14(8):738. doi: 10.3390/ph14080738.

Janus Kinase Inhibitors and Coronavirus Disease (COVID)-19: Rationale, Clinical 
Evidence and Safety Issues.

Gatti M(1)(2), Turrini E(3), Raschi E(1), Sestili P(4), Fimognari C(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater 
Studiorum-Università di Bologna, Via Irnerio 48, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(2)SSD Clinical Pharmacology, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria 
Sant'Orsola, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department for Life Quality Studies, Alma Mater Studiorum-Università di 
Bologna, C.so D'Augusto 237, 47921 Rimini, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomolecular Sciences (DISB), Università degli Studi di Urbino 
Carlo Bo, Via I Maggetti 26, 61029 Urbino, Italy.

We are witnessing a paradigm shift in drug development and clinical practice to 
fight the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and a number of clinical trials 
have been or are being testing various pharmacological approaches to counteract 
viral load and its complications such as cytokine storm. However, data on the 
effectiveness of antiviral and immune therapies are still inconclusive and 
inconsistent. As compared to other candidate drugs to treat COVID-19, Janus 
Kinase (JAK) inhibitors, including baricitinib and ruxolitinib, possess key 
pharmacological features for a potentially successful repurposing: convenient 
oral administration, favorable pharmacokinetic profile, multifunctional 
pharmacodynamics by exerting dual anti-inflammatory and anti-viral effects. 
Baricitinib, originally approved for rheumatoid arthritis, received Emergency 
Use Authorization in November 2020 by the Food and Drug Administration in 
combination with remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized 
patients ≥ 2 years old who require supplemental oxygen, invasive mechanical 
ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. By July 2021, the European 
Medicines Agency is also expected to issue the opinion on whether or not to 
extend its use in hospitalised patients from 10 years of age who require 
supplemental oxygen. Ruxolitinib, approved for myelofibrosis, was prescribed in 
patients with COVID-19 within an open-label Emergency Expanded Access Plan. This 
review will address key milestones in the discovery and use of JAK inhibitors in 
COVID-19, from artificial intelligence to current clinical evidence, including 
real world experience, and critically appraise emerging safety issues, namely 
infections, thrombosis, and liver injury. An outlook to ongoing studies 
(clinicaltrials.gov) and unpublished pharmacovigilance data is also offered.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14080738
PMCID: PMC8401109
PMID: 34451835

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


32. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2018 Jun 5;11(2):57. doi: 10.3390/ph11020057.

Changing Trends in Computational Drug Repositioning.

Yella JK(1), Yaddanapudi S(2), Wang Y(3), Jegga AG(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way MLC 7024, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
Jaswanth.Yella@cchmc.org.
(2)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way MLC 7024, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
Suryanarayana.Yaddanapudi@cchmc.org.
(3)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way MLC 7024, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
Yunguan.Wang@cchmc.org.
(4)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way MLC 7024, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
anil.jegga@cchmc.org.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. anil.jegga@cchmc.org.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of Cincinnati College of 
Engineering, Cincinnati, OH 45219, USA. anil.jegga@cchmc.org.

Efforts to maximize the indications potential and revenue from drugs that are 
already marketed are largely motivated by what Sir James Black, a Nobel 
Prize-winning pharmacologist advocated-"The most fruitful basis for the 
discovery of a new drug is to start with an old drug". However, rational design 
of drug mixtures poses formidable challenges because of the lack of or limited 
information about in vivo cell regulation, mechanisms of genetic pathway 
activation, and in vivo pathway interactions. Hence, most of the successfully 
repositioned drugs are the result of "serendipity", discovered during late phase 
clinical studies of unexpected but beneficial findings. The connections between 
drug candidates and their potential adverse drug reactions or new applications 
are often difficult to foresee because the underlying mechanism associating them 
is largely unknown, complex, or dispersed and buried in silos of information. 
Discovery of such multi-domain pharmacomodules-pharmacologically relevant 
sub-networks of biomolecules and/or pathways-from collection of databases by 
independent/simultaneous mining of multiple datasets is an active area of 
research. Here, while presenting some of the promising bioinformatics approaches 
and pipelines, we summarize and discuss the current and evolving landscape of 
computational drug repositioning.

DOI: 10.3390/ph11020057
PMCID: PMC6027196
PMID: 29874824

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


33. Drug Saf. 2019 Jun;42(6):721-725. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-00794-y.

A Machine-Learning Algorithm to Optimise Automated Adverse Drug Reaction 
Detection from Clinical Coding.

McMaster C(1)(2), Liew D(3)(4), Keith C(5), Aminian P(5), Frauman A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Austin Health, Level 5, Lance Townsend 
Building, Studley Rd, Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia. 
christopher.mcmaster@austin.org.au.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia. 
christopher.mcmaster@austin.org.au.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Austin Health, Level 5, Lance Townsend 
Building, Studley Rd, Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.

Erratum in
    Drug Saf. 2019 Apr 15;:

INTRODUCTION: Adverse drug reaction (ADR) detection in hospitals is heavily 
reliant on spontaneous reporting by clinical staff, with studies in the 
literature pointing to high rates of underreporting [1]. International 
Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) codes have been used in 
epidemiological studies of ADRs and offer the potential for automated ADR 
detection systems.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop an automated ADR detection 
system based on ICD-10 codes, using machine-learning algorithms to improve 
accuracy and efficiency.
METHODS: For a 12-month period from December 2016 to November 2017, every 
inpatient episode receiving an ICD-10 code in the range Y40.0-Y59.9 (ADR code) 
was flagged for review as a potential ADR. Each flagged admission was assessed 
by an expert pharmacist and, if needed, reviewed at regular ADR committee 
meetings. For each report, a determination was made about ADR probability and 
severity. The dataset was randomly split into training and test sets. A 
machine-learning model using the random forest algorithm was developed on the 
training set to discriminate between true and false ADR reports. The model was 
then applied to the test set to assess accuracy using the area under the 
receiver operating characteristic (AUC).
RESULTS: In the study period, 2917 Y40.0-Y59.9 codes were applied to admissions, 
resulting in 245 ADR reports after review. These 245 reports accounted for 44.5% 
of all ADR reporting in our hospital in the study period. A random forest model 
built on the training set was able to discriminate between true and false 
reports on the test set with an AUC of 0.803.
CONCLUSIONS: Automated ADR detection using ICD-10 coding significantly improved 
ADR detection in the study period, with improved discrimination between true and 
false reports by applying a machine-learning model.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-00794-y
PMID: 30725336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2021 Jan 25;2020:756-762. eCollection 2020.

Neural Multi-Task Learning for Adverse Drug Reaction Extraction.

Liu F(1), Zheng X(1), Yu H(2), Tjia J(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA.

A reliable and searchable knowledge database of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) is 
highly important and valuable for improving patient safety at the point of care. 
In this paper, we proposed a neural multi-task learning system, NeuroADR, to 
extract ADRs as well as relevant modifiers from free-text drug labels. 
Specifically, the NeuroADR system exploited a hierarchical multi-task learning 
(HMTL) framework to perform named entity recognition (NER) and relation 
extraction (RE) jointly, where interactions among the learned deep encoder 
representations from different subtasks are explored. Different from the 
conventional HMTL approach, NeuroADR adopted a novel task decomposition strategy 
to generate auxiliary subtasks for more inter-task interactions and integrated a 
new label encoding schema for better handling discontinuous entities. 
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system.

©2020 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC8075418
PMID: 33936450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2021 May 17;2021:420-429. eCollection 2021.

Extracting Adverse Drug Events from Clinical Notes.

Mahendran D(1), McInnes BT(1).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 
USA.

Adverse drug events (ADEs) are unexpected incidents caused by the administration 
of a drug or medication. To identify and extract these events, we require 
information about not just the drug itself but attributes describing the drug 
(e.g., strength, dosage), the reason why the drug was initially prescribed, and 
any adverse reaction to the drug. This paper explores the relationship between a 
drug and its associated attributes using relation extraction techniques. We 
explore three approaches: a rule-based approach, a deep learning-based approach, 
and a contextualized language model-based approach. We evaluate our system on 
the n2c2-2018 ADE extraction dataset. Our experimental results demonstrate that 
the contextualized language model-based approach outperformed other models 
overall and obtain the state-of-the-art performance in ADE extraction with a 
Precision of 0.93, Recall of 0.96, and an F1 score of 0.94; however, for certain 
relation types, the rule-based approach obtained a higher Precision and Recall 
than either learning approach.

©2021 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC8378605
PMID: 34457157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2021 Nov;48(12):3791-3804. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-021-05339-7. Epub 2021 Apr 13.

Distributed learning: a reliable privacy-preserving strategy to change 
multicenter collaborations using AI.

Kirienko M(1)(2), Sollini M(3)(4), Ninatti G(2), Loiacono D(5), Giacomello E(5), 
Gozzi N(6), Amigoni F(5), Mainardi L(5), Lanzi PL(5), Chiti A(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Milan, Italy. martina.sollini@hunimed.eu.
(4)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy. 
martina.sollini@hunimed.eu.
(5)DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(6)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: The present scoping review aims to assess the non-inferiority of 
distributed learning over centrally and locally trained machine learning (ML) 
models in medical applications.
METHODS: We performed a literature search using the term "distributed learning" 
OR "federated learning" in the PubMed/MEDLINE and EMBASE databases. No start 
date limit was used, and the search was extended until July 21, 2020. We 
excluded articles outside the field of interest; guidelines or expert opinion, 
review articles and meta-analyses, editorials, letters or commentaries, and 
conference abstracts; articles not in the English language; and studies not 
using medical data. Selected studies were classified and analysed according to 
their aim(s).
RESULTS: We included 26 papers aimed at predicting one or more outcomes: namely 
risk, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment side effect/adverse drug reaction. 
Distributed learning was compared to centralized or localized training in 21/26 
and 14/26 selected papers, respectively. Regardless of the aim, the type of 
input, the method, and the classifier, distributed learning performed close to 
centralized training, but two experiments focused on diagnosis. In all but 2 
cases, distributed learning outperformed locally trained models.
CONCLUSION: Distributed learning resulted in a reliable strategy for model 
development; indeed, it performed equally to models trained on centralized 
datasets. Sensitive data can get preserved since they are not shared for model 
development. Distributed learning constitutes a promising solution for ML-based 
research and practice since large, diverse datasets are crucial for success.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-021-05339-7
PMCID: PMC8041944
PMID: 33847779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Prof. Chiti reports a fellowship grant from 
Sanofi, personal fees from AAA, Blue Earth Diagnostics, and General Electric 
Healthcare outside the submitted work. Prof. Amigoni reports personal fees from 
Sandoz, outside the submitted work. The other authors do not report any conflict 
of interest.


37. J Med Internet Res. 2019 Feb 6;21(2):e11016. doi: 10.2196/11016.

Detecting Potential Adverse Drug Reactions Using a Deep Neural Network Model.

Wang CS(1), Lin PJ(1), Cheng CL(2)(3)(4), Tai SH(4), Kao Yang YH(2)(3), Chiang 
JH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng 
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Medical Informatics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are common and are the underlying 
cause of over a million serious injuries and deaths each year. The most familiar 
method to detect ADRs is relying on spontaneous reports. Unfortunately, the low 
reporting rate of spontaneous reports is a serious limitation of 
pharmacovigilance.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify a method to detect 
potential ADRs of drugs automatically using a deep neural network (DNN).
METHODS: We designed a DNN model that utilizes the chemical, biological, and 
biomedical information of drugs to detect ADRs. This model aimed to fulfill two 
main purposes: identifying the potential ADRs of drugs and predicting the 
possible ADRs of a new drug. For improving the detection performance, we 
distributed representations of the target drugs in a vector space to capture the 
drug relationships using the word-embedding approach to process substantial 
biomedical literature. Moreover, we built a mapping function to address new 
drugs that do not appear in the dataset.
RESULTS: Using the drug information and the ADRs reported up to 2009, we 
predicted the ADRs of drugs recorded up to 2012. There were 746 drugs and 232 
new drugs, which were only recorded in 2012 with 1325 ADRs. The experimental 
results showed that the overall performance of our model with mean average 
precision at top-10 achieved is 0.523 and the rea under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) score achieved is 0.844 for ADR prediction on the 
dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: Our model is effective in identifying the potential ADRs of a drug 
and the possible ADRs of a new drug. Most importantly, it can detect potential 
ADRs irrespective of whether they have been reported in the past.

©Chi-Shiang Wang, Pei-Ju Lin, Ching-Lan Cheng, Shu-Hua Tai, Yea-Huei Kao Yang, 
Jung-Hsien Chiang. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (http://www.jmir.org), 06.02.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/11016
PMCID: PMC6381404
PMID: 30724742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


38. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Jun 24;101(25):e29387. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000029387.

Analyzing adverse drug reaction using statistical and machine learning methods: 
A systematic review.

Kim HR(1), Sung M(1), Park JA(1), Jeong K(1), Kim HH(1), Lee S(2), Park YR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Systems Informatics, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Konyang University College of Medicine, 
Daejeon, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are unintended negative drug-induced 
responses. Determining the association between drugs and ADRs is crucial, and 
several methods have been proposed to demonstrate this association. This 
systematic review aimed to examine the analytical tools by considering original 
articles that utilized statistical and machine learning methods for detecting 
ADRs.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted based on articles 
published between 2015 and 2020. The keywords used were statistical, machine 
learning, and deep learning methods for detecting ADR signals. The study was 
conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses statement (PRISMA) guidelines.
RESULTS: We reviewed 72 articles, of which 51 and 21 addressed statistical and 
machine learning methods, respectively. Electronic medical record (EMR) data 
were exclusively analyzed using the regression method. For FDA Adverse Event 
Reporting System (FAERS) data, components of the disproportionality method were 
preferable. DrugBank was the most used database for machine learning. Other 
methods accounted for the highest and supervised methods accounted for the 
second highest.
CONCLUSIONS: Using the 72 main articles, this review provides guidelines on 
which databases are frequently utilized and which analysis methods can be 
connected. For statistical analysis, >90% of the cases were analyzed by 
disproportionate or regression analysis with each spontaneous reporting system 
(SRS) data or electronic medical record (EMR) data; for machine learning 
research, however, there was a strong tendency to analyze various data 
combinations. Only half of the DrugBank database was occupied, and the k-nearest 
neighbor method accounted for the greatest proportion.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000029387
PMCID: PMC9276413
PMID: 35758373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.


39. Bioimpacts. 2016;6(2):71-8. doi: 10.15171/bi.2016.10. Epub 2016 Jun 16.

Computerized techniques pave the way for drug-drug interaction prediction and 
interpretation.

Safdari R(1), Ferdousi R(2), Aziziheris K(3), Niakan-Kalhori SR(1), Omidi Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Information Management, School of Allied Medical 
Sciences, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Health Information Management, School of Allied Medical 
Sciences, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Research Center 
for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Health care industry also patients penalized by medical errors 
that are inevitable but highly preventable. Vast majority of medical errors are 
related to adverse drug reactions, while drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are the 
main cause of adverse drug reactions (ADRs). DDIs and ADRs have mainly been 
reported by haphazard case studies. Experimental in vivo and in vitro researches 
also reveals DDI pairs. Laboratory and experimental researches are valuable but 
also expensive and in some cases researchers may suffer from limitations.
METHODS: In the current investigation, the latest published works were studied 
to analyze the trend and pattern of the DDI modelling and the impacts of machine 
learning methods. Applications of computerized techniques were also investigated 
for the prediction and interpretation of DDIs.
RESULTS: Computerized data-mining in pharmaceutical sciences and related 
databases provide new key transformative paradigms that can revolutionize the 
treatment of diseases and hence medical care. Given that various aspects of drug 
discovery and pharmacotherapy are closely related to the clinical and 
molecular/biological information, the scientifically sound databases (e.g., 
DDIs, ADRs) can be of importance for the success of pharmacotherapy modalities.
CONCLUSION: A better understanding of DDIs not only provides a robust means for 
designing more effective medicines but also grantees patient safety.

DOI: 10.15171/bi.2016.10
PMCID: PMC4981251
PMID: 27525223


40. J Biomed Inform. 2020 Oct;110:103552. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103552. Epub 2020 
Sep 2.

Adverse drug event detection using reason assignments in FDA drug labels.

Sutphin C(1), Lee K(2), Yepes AJ(3), Uzuner Ö(2), McInnes BT(4).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. Electronic address: 
sutphincj@vcu.edu.
(2)George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.
(3)IBM Research Australia, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

Adverse drug events (ADEs) are unintended incidents that involve the taking of a 
medication. ADEs pose significant health and financial problems worldwide. 
Information about ADEs can inform health care and improve patient safety. 
However, much of this information is buried in narrative texts and needs to be 
extracted with Natural Language Processing techniques, in order to be useful to 
computerized methods. ADEs can be found on drug labels, contained in the 
different sections such as descriptions of the drug's active components or more 
prominently in descriptions of studied side-effects. Extracting these 
automatically could be useful in triaging and processing drug reports. In this 
paper, we present three base methods consisting of a Conditional Random Field 
(CRF), a bi-directional Long Short Term Memory unit with a CRF layer 
(biLSTM+CRF), and a pre-trained Bi-directional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers (BERT) model. We also present several ensembles of the CRF and 
biLSTM+CRF methods for extracting ADEs and their Reason from FDA drug labels. We 
show that all three methods perform well on our task, and that combining the 
models through different ensemble methods can improve results, providing 
increases in recall for the majority class and improving precision for all other 
classes. We also show the potential of framing ADE extraction from drug labels 
as a multi-class classification task on the Reason, or type, of ADE.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103552
PMCID: PMC8349471
PMID: 32890727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Curr Pharm Des. 2020;26(26):3096-3104. doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200612163819.

A Review of Drug Side Effect Identification Methods.

Deng S(1), Sun Y(2), Zhao T(3), Hu Y(3), Zang T(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Science, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China.
(2)Microbiology Department, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081, China.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science and 
Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China.

Drug side effects have become an important indicator for evaluating the safety 
of drugs. There are two main factors in the frequent occurrence of drug safety 
problems; on the one hand, the clinical understanding of drug side effects is 
insufficient, leading to frequent adverse drug reactions, while on the other 
hand, due to the long-term period and complexity of clinical trials, side 
effects of approved drugs on the market cannot be reported in a timely manner. 
Therefore, many researchers have focused on developing methods to identify drug 
side effects. In this review, we summarize the methods of identifying drug side 
effects and common databases in this field. We classified methods of identifying 
side effects into four categories: biological experimental, machine learning, 
text mining and network methods. We point out the key points of each kind of 
method. In addition, we also explain the advantages and disadvantages of each 
method. Finally, we propose future research directions.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612826666200612163819
PMID: 32532187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2019 Jan-Feb;16(1):139-153. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2018.2849968. Epub 2018 Jun 25.

Natural Language Processing for EHR-Based Computational Phenotyping.

Zeng Z, Deng Y, Li X, Naumann T, Luo Y.

This article reviews recent advances in applying natural language processing 
(NLP) to Electronic Health Records (EHRs) for computational phenotyping. 
NLP-based computational phenotyping has numerous applications including 
diagnosis categorization, novel phenotype discovery, clinical trial screening, 
pharmacogenomics, drug-drug interaction (DDI), and adverse drug event (ADE) 
detection, as well as genome-wide and phenome-wide association studies. 
Significant progress has been made in algorithm development and resource 
construction for computational phenotyping. Among the surveyed methods, 
well-designed keyword search and rule-based systems often achieve good 
performance. However, the construction of keyword and rule lists requires 
significant manual effort, which is difficult to scale. Supervised machine 
learning models have been favored because they are capable of acquiring both 
classification patterns and structures from data. Recently, deep learning and 
unsupervised learning have received growing attention, with the former favored 
for its performance and the latter for its ability to find novel phenotypes. 
Integrating heterogeneous data sources have become increasingly important and 
have shown promise in improving model performance. Often, better performance is 
achieved by combining multiple modalities of information. Despite these many 
advances, challenges and opportunities remain for NLP-based computational 
phenotyping, including better model interpretability and generalizability, and 
proper characterization of feature relations in clinical narratives.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2018.2849968
PMCID: PMC6388621
PMID: 29994486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Yearb Med Inform. 2021 Aug;30(1):233-238. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1726514. Epub 2021 
Sep 3.

Key Contributions in Clinical Research Informatics.

Daniel C(1)(2), Bellamine A(1), Kalra D(3); Section Editors of the IMIA Yearbook 
Section on Clinical Research Informatics.

Author information:
(1)Information Technology Department, AP-HP, F-75012 Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne University, University Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, INSERM UMR_S 
1142, LIMICS, F-75006 Paris, France.
(3)The University of Gent, Gent, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: To summarize key contributions to current research in the field of 
Clinical Research Informatics (CRI) and to select best papers published in 2020.
METHOD: A bibliographic search using a combination of Medical Subject Headings 
(MeSH) descriptors and free-text terms on CRI was performed using PubMed, 
followed by a double-blind review in order to select a list of candidate best 
papers to be then peer-reviewed by external reviewers. After peer-review 
ranking, a consensus meeting between two section editors and the editorial team 
was organized to finally conclude on the selected four best papers.
RESULTS: Among the 877 papers published in 2020 and returned by the search, 
there were four best papers selected. The first best paper describes a method 
for mining temporal sequences from clinical documents to infer disease 
trajectories and enhancing high-throughput phenotyping. The authors of the 
second best paper demonstrate that the generation of synthetic Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) data through Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) could be 
substantially improved by more appropriate training and evaluation criteria. The 
third best paper offers an efficient advance on methods to detect adverse drug 
events by computer-assisting expert reviewers with annotated candidate mentions 
in clinical documents. The large-scale data quality assessment study reported by 
the fourth best paper has clinical research informatics implications, in terms 
of the trustworthiness of inferences made from analysing electronic health 
records.
CONCLUSIONS: The most significant research efforts in the CRI field are 
currently focusing on data science with active research in the development and 
evaluation of Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms based 
on ever more intensive use of real-world data and especially EHR real or 
synthetic data. A major lesson that the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic has already taught the scientific CRI community is that timely 
international high-quality data-sharing and collaborative data analysis is 
absolutely vital to inform policy decisions.

IMIA and Thieme. This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License, 
permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given 
appropriate credit. Contents may not be used for commercial purposes, or 
adapted, remixed, transformed or built upon. 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1726514
PMCID: PMC8416193
PMID: 34479395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


44. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Dec 28;19(Suppl 21):476. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-018-2544-0.

Predicting adverse drug reactions through interpretable deep learning framework.

Dey S(1), Luo H(1), Fokoue A(2), Hu J(1), Zhang P(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Health, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 
Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
(2)Cognitive Computing, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, 
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
(3)Center for Computational Health, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 
Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. mail.pingzhang@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are unintended and harmful reactions 
caused by normal uses of drugs. Predicting and preventing ADRs in the early 
stage of the drug development pipeline can help to enhance drug safety and 
reduce financial costs.
METHODS: In this paper, we developed machine learning models including a deep 
learning framework which can simultaneously predict ADRs and identify the 
molecular substructures associated with those ADRs without defining the 
substructures a-priori.
RESULTS: We evaluated the performance of our model with ten different 
state-of-the-art fingerprint models and found that neural fingerprints from the 
deep learning model outperformed all other methods in predicting ADRs. Via 
feature analysis on drug structures, we identified important molecular 
substructures that are associated with specific ADRs and assessed their 
associations via statistical analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The deep learning model with feature analysis, substructure 
identification, and statistical assessment provides a promising solution for 
identifying risky components within molecular structures and can potentially 
help to improve drug safety evaluation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2544-0
PMCID: PMC6300887
PMID: 30591036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


45. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2017 Feb;14(1):1-6. doi: 10.1007/s11897-017-0314-3.

Towards Precision in HF Pharmacotherapy.

Norgard NB(1), Hempel C(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri Kansas City School of Medicine, 2411 Holmes St, Kansas 
City, MO, 64108, USA. norgardn@umkc.edu.
(2)University at Buffalo School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 216 
Kapoor Hall, Buffalo, NY, 14203, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Heart failure (HF) is a disease state with great 
heterogeneity, which complicates the therapeutic process. Identifying more 
precise HF phenotypes will allow for the development of more targeted therapies 
and improvement in patient outcomes. This review explores the future for 
precision medicine in HF treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Rather than a continuous disease spectrum with a uniform 
pathogenesis, HF has phenotypes with different underlying pathophysiologic 
features. The challenge is to establish clinical phenotypic characterizations to 
direct therapy. Phenomapping, a process of using machine learning algorithms 
applied to clinical data sets, has been used to identify phenotypically distinct 
and clinically meaningful HF groups. As powerful technologies extend our 
knowledge, future analyses may be able to compile more comprehensive phenotypic 
profiles using genetic, epigenetic, proteomic, and metabolomic measurements. 
Identifying clinical characterizations of particular HF patients that would be 
uniquely or disproportionately responsive to a specific treatment would allow 
for more direct selection of optimal therapy, reduce trial-and-error 
prescribing, and help avoid adverse drug reactions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11897-017-0314-3
PMID: 28190189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021 Mar 1;28(3):569-577. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa218.

Deep learning approaches for extracting adverse events and indications of 
dietary supplements from clinical text.

Fan Y(1), Zhou S(1), Li Y(2), Zhang R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)College of Pharmacy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing deep learning 
models to extract safety signals related to the use of dietary supplements (DSs) 
in clinical text.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two tasks were performed in this study. For the named 
entity recognition (NER) task, Bi-LSTM-CRF (bidirectional long short-term memory 
conditional random field) and BERT (bidirectional encoder representations from 
transformers) models were trained and compared with CRF model as a baseline to 
recognize the named entities of DSs and events from clinical notes. In the 
relation extraction (RE) task, 2 deep learning models, including attention-based 
Bi-LSTM and convolutional neural network as well as a random forest model were 
trained to extract the relations between DSs and events, which were categorized 
into 3 classes: positive (ie, indication), negative (ie, adverse events), and 
not related. The best performed NER and RE models were further applied on 
clinical notes mentioning 88 DSs for discovering DSs adverse events and 
indications, which were compared with a DS knowledge base.
RESULTS: For the NER task, deep learning models achieved a better performance 
than CRF, with F1 scores above 0.860. The attention-based Bi-LSTM model 
performed the best in the RE task, with an F1 score of 0.893. When comparing DS 
event pairs generated by the deep learning models with the knowledge base for 
DSs and event, we found both known and unknown pairs.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep learning models can detect adverse events and indication of 
DSs in clinical notes, which hold great potential for monitoring the safety of 
DS use.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa218
PMCID: PMC7936508
PMID: 33150942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Drug Saf. 2019 Apr;42(4):491-497. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-0746-z.

Artificial Intelligence and the Future of the Drug Safety Professional.

Danysz K(1), Cicirello S(2), Mingle E(3), Assuncao B(3), Tetarenko N(3), Mockute 
R(3), Abatemarco D(3), Widdowson M(3), Desai S(3).

Author information:
(1)Celgene International Sàrl, Route de Perreux 1, 2017, Boudry, Switzerland. 
kdanysz@celgene.com.
(2)Celgene International Sàrl, Route de Perreux 1, 2017, Boudry, Switzerland.
(3)Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Ave, Summit, NJ, 07901, USA.

The healthcare industry, and specifically the pharmacovigilance industry, 
recognizes the need to support the increasing amount of data received from 
individual case safety reports (ICSRs). To cope with this increase, more 
healthcare and qualified professionals are required to capture and evaluate the 
data. To address the evolving landscape, it will be necessary to embrace 
assistive technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) at scale. AI in the 
field of pharmacovigilance will possibly result in the transformation of the 
drug safety (DS) professional's daily work life and their career development. 
Celgene's Global Drug Safety and Risk Management (GDSRM) function has 
established a series of work activities to drive innovation across the 
pharmacovigilance value chain (Celgene Chrysalis Fact Sheet. 
https://www.celgene.com/newsroom/media-library/chrysalis-fact-sheet/, 2018). The 
development of AI in pharmacovigilance raises questions about the possible 
changes in DS professionals' lives, who may find themselves curious about their 
future roles in a workplace assisted by AI. We discuss the current state of 
pharmacovigilance and the DS professional, AI in pharmacovigilance and the 
potential skillsets a DS professional may require when working with AI. We also 
describe the results of research conducted at Celgene GDSRM. The objective of 
the research was to understand the thoughts of pharmacovigilance professionals 
about their jobs. These results are provided in the form of aggregated responses 
to interview questions based on a 12-part questionnaire [see the Electronic 
Supplementary Material (ESM)]. A sample of six DS professionals representing 
various areas of pharmacovigilance operations were asked a range of questions 
about their backgrounds, current roles and future expectations. The DS 
professionals interviewed were, overall, enthusiastic about their job roles 
potentially changing with AI enhancements. Interviewees suggested that AI would 
allow for pharmacovigilance resources, time, and skills to shift the work from a 
volume-based to a value-based focus. The results suggest that pharmacovigilance 
professionals wish to use their qualifications, skillsets and experience in work 
that provides more value for their efforts. Machine learning algorithms have the 
potential to enhance DS professionals' decision-making processes and support 
more efficient and accurate case processing.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-0746-z
PMCID: PMC6450851
PMID: 30343417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Karolina Danysz is a paid employee of Celgene 
International Sàrl, Switzerland, working as a Senior Drug Safety Innovation 
Specialist. Salvatore Cicirello, Edward Mingle, Bruno Assuncao, Niki Tetarenko, 
Ruta Mockute, Danielle Abatemarco, Mark Widdowson, and Sameen Desai are 
employees of Celgene Corporation. All authors and those interviewed as part of 
this research were employees of Celgene Corporation at the time this paper was 
written and have no other potential conflicts of interest that are directly 
relevant to the contents.


48. Mol Diagn Ther. 2018 Aug;22(4):409-420. doi: 10.1007/s40291-018-0335-y.

The Role of Pharmacogenomics in Bipolar Disorder: Moving Towards Precision 
Medicine.

Pisanu C(1)(2), Heilbronner U(3), Squassina A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Neuroscience and Clinical 
Pharmacology, University of Cagliari, sp 6, 09042, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Functional Pharmacology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, 
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Neuroscience and Clinical 
Pharmacology, University of Cagliari, sp 6, 09042, Cagliari, Italy. 
squassina@unica.it.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. 
squassina@unica.it.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a common and disabling psychiatric condition with a 
severe socioeconomic impact. BD is treated with mood stabilizers, among which 
lithium represents the first-line treatment. Lithium alone or in combination is 
effective in 60% of chronically treated patients, but response 
remains heterogenous and a large number of patients require a change in therapy 
after several weeks or months. Many studies have so far tried to identify 
molecular and genetic markers that could help us to predict response to mood 
stabilizers or the risk for adverse drug reactions. Pharmacogenetic studies in 
BD have been for the most part focused on lithium, but the complexity and 
variability of the response phenotype, together with the unclear mechanism of 
action of lithium, limited the power of these studies to identify robust 
biomarkers. Recent pharmacogenomic studies on lithium response have provided 
promising findings, suggesting that the integration of genome-wide 
investigations with deep phenotyping, in silico analyses and machine learning 
could lead us closer to personalized treatments for BD. Nevertheless, to date 
none of the genes suggested by pharmacogenetic studies on mood stabilizers have 
been included in any of the genetic tests approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for drug efficacy. On the other hand, genetic information 
has been included in drug labels to test for the safety of carbamazepine and 
valproate. In this review, we will outline available studies investigating the 
pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics of lithium and other mood stabilizers, 
with a specific focus on the limitations of these studies and potential 
strategies to overcome them. We will also discuss FDA-approved pharmacogenetic 
tests for treatments commonly used in the management of BD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-018-0335-y
PMID: 29790107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Artif Intell Med. 2018 May;87:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2018.03.001. Epub 2018 
Mar 17.

Position-aware deep multi-task learning for drug-drug interaction extraction.

Zhou D(1), Miao L(2), He Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer 
Network and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, Southeast 
University, Nanjing 210096, China. Electronic address: d.zhou@seu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Computer 
Network and Information Integration, Ministry of Education, Southeast 
University, Nanjing 210096, China. Electronic address: miaolei@seu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Engineering and Applied Science, Aston University, UK. Electronic 
address: y.he@cantab.net.

OBJECTIVE: A drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a situation in which a drug affects 
the activity of another drug synergistically or antagonistically when being 
administered together. The information of DDIs is crucial for healthcare 
professionals to prevent adverse drug events. Although some known DDIs can be 
found in purposely-built databases such as DrugBank, most information is still 
buried in scientific publications. Therefore, automatically extracting DDIs from 
biomedical texts is sorely needed.
METHODS AND MATERIAL: In this paper, we propose a novel position-aware deep 
multi-task learning approach for extracting DDIs from biomedical texts. In 
particular, sentences are represented as a sequence of word embeddings and 
position embeddings. An attention-based bidirectional long short-term memory 
(BiLSTM) network is used to encode each sentence. The relative position 
information of words with the target drugs in text is combined with the hidden 
states of BiLSTM to generate the position-aware attention weights. Moreover, the 
tasks of predicting whether or not two drugs interact with each other and 
further distinguishing the types of interactions are learned jointly in 
multi-task learning framework.
RESULTS: The proposed approach has been evaluated on the DDIExtraction challenge 
2013 corpus and the results show that with the position-aware attention only, 
our proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 0.99% for 
binary DDI classification, and with both position-aware attention and multi-task 
learning, our approach achieves a micro F-score of 72.99% on interaction type 
identification, outperforming the state-of-the-art approach by 1.51%, which 
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2018.03.001
PMID: 29559249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2020 Jun 16;270:198-202. doi: 10.3233/SHTI200150.

Emerging Concepts and Applied Machine Learning Research in Patients with 
Drug-Induced Repolarization Disorders.

Bjelogrlic M(1), Robert A(1), Miribel A, Namdar M(2), Gencer B(2)(3), Lovis 
C(1), Girardin F(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Information Sciences, University Hospitals of Geneva and 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva 
and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospitals, TIMI study group, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, United States of America.
(4)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology; Medical Direction, 
University Hospitals of Geneva and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

The paper presents a review of current research to develop predictive models for 
automated detection of drug-induced repolarization disorders and shows a 
feasibility study for developing machine learning tools trained on massive 
multimodal datasets of narrative, textual and electrocardiographic records. The 
goal is to reduce drug-induced long QT and associated complications 
(Torsades-de-Pointes, sudden cardiac death), by identifying prescription 
patterns with pro-arrhythmic propensity using a validated electronic application 
for the detection of adverse drug events with data mining and natural language 
processing; and to compute individual-based predictive scores in order to 
further identify clinical conditions, concomitant diseases, or other variables 
that correlate with higher risk of pro-arrhythmic situations.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI200150
PMID: 32570374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Drug Saf. 2017 Nov;40(11):1075-1089. doi: 10.1007/s40264-017-0558-6.

Natural Language Processing for EHR-Based Pharmacovigilance: A Structured 
Review.

Luo Y(1), Thompson WK(2), Herr TM(2), Zeng Z(2), Berendsen MA(3), Jonnalagadda 
SR(2)(4), Carson MB(2), Starren J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, 750 North Lake Shore Drive, 11th floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. 
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, 750 North Lake Shore Drive, 11th floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(3)Galter Health Sciences Library, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, 750 North Lake Shore Drive, 11th floor, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(4)Knowledge and Conversation Group, Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA.

Comment in
    Drug Saf. 2017 Nov;40(11):1047-1048.

The goal of pharmacovigilance is to detect, monitor, characterize and prevent 
adverse drug events (ADEs) with pharmaceutical products. This article is a 
comprehensive structured review of recent advances in applying natural language 
processing (NLP) to electronic health record (EHR) narratives for 
pharmacovigilance. We review methods of varying complexity and problem focus, 
summarize the current state-of-the-art in methodology advancement, discuss 
limitations and point out several promising future directions. The ability to 
accurately capture both semantic and syntactic structures in clinical narratives 
becomes increasingly critical to enable efficient and accurate ADE detection. 
Significant progress has been made in algorithm development and resource 
construction since 2000. Since 2012, statistical analysis and machine learning 
methods have gained traction in automation of ADE mining from EHR narratives. 
Current state-of-the-art methods for NLP-based ADE detection from EHRs show 
promise regarding their integration into production pharmacovigilance systems. 
In addition, integrating multifaceted, heterogeneous data sources has shown 
promise in improving ADE detection and has become increasingly adopted. On the 
other hand, challenges and opportunities remain across the frontier of NLP 
application to EHR-based pharmacovigilance, including proper characterization of 
ADE context, differentiation between off- and on-label drug-use ADEs, 
recognition of the importance of polypharmacy-induced ADEs, better integration 
of heterogeneous data sources, creation of shared corpora, and organization of 
shared-task challenges to advance the state-of-the-art.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-017-0558-6
PMID: 28643174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2019 Apr;44(2):268-275. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.12786. Epub 2018 
Dec 18.

Similarity-based machine learning support vector machine predictor of drug-drug 
interactions with improved accuracies.

Song D(1)(2), Chen Y(3), Min Q(3), Sun Q(3), Ye K(4), Zhou C(3), Yuan S(3), Sun 
Z(2), Liao J(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Guizhou University, Guiyang, China.
(2)Department of Urology, GuiZhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang, China.
(3)School of Science, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(4)MandalaT Software Corporation, F5, Wuxi, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Drug Quality Control and Pharmacovigilance (China 
Pharmaceutical University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China.

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Drug-drug interactions (DDI) are frequent causes of 
adverse clinical drug reactions. Efforts have been directed at the early stage 
to achieve accurate identification of DDI for drug safety assessments, including 
the development of in silico predictive methods. In particular, similarity-based 
in silico methods have been developed to assess DDI with good accuracies, and 
machine learning methods have been employed to further extend the predictive 
range of similarity-based approaches. However, the performance of a developed 
machine learning method is lower than expectations partly because of the use of 
less diverse DDI training data sets and a less optimal set of similarity 
measures.
METHOD: In this work, we developed a machine learning model using support vector 
machines (SVMs) based on the literature-reported established set of similarity 
measures and comprehensive training data sets. The established similarity 
measures include the 2D molecular structure similarity, 3D pharmacophoric 
similarity, interaction profile fingerprint (IPF) similarity, target similarity 
and adverse drug effect (ADE) similarity, which were extracted from well-known 
databases, such as DrugBank and Side Effect Resource (SIDER). A pairwise kernel 
was constructed for the known and possible drug pairs based on the five 
established similarity measures and then used as the input vector of the SVM.
RESULT: The 10-fold cross-validation studies showed a predictive performance of 
AUROC >0.97, which is significantly improved compared with the AUROC of 0.67 of 
an analogously developed machine learning model. Our study suggested that a 
similarity-based SVM prediction is highly useful for identifying DDI.
CONCLUSION: in silico methods based on multifarious drug similarities have been 
suggested to be feasible for DDI prediction in various studies. In this way, our 
pairwise kernel SVM model had better accuracies than some previous works, which 
can be used as a pharmacovigilance tool to detect potential DDI.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpt.12786
PMID: 30565313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cells. 2021 Nov 9;10(11):3092. doi: 10.3390/cells10113092.

Machine Learning-Based Prediction of Drug-Drug Interactions for Histamine 
Antagonist Using Hybrid Chemical Features.

Dang LH(1), Dung NT(2)(3), Quang LX(1), Hung LQ(4), Le NH(5), Le NTN(5), Diem 
NT(6), Nga NTT(7), Hung SH(8)(9)(10), Le NQK(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 70000, Vietnam.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Da Nang Hospital of C, Da Nang City 50000, 
Vietnam.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Da Nang University of Medical Technology and 
Pharmacy, Da Nang City 50000, Vietnam.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, University Medical Center, Ho Chi Minh City 
70000, Vietnam.
(5)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Materials and Tissue Engineering, College of 
Biomedical Engineering, Taipei Medical University, Taipei City 110, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Cai Lay Regional General Hospital, Cai Lay 
84000, Vietnam.
(7)Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, Hanoi Medical University, Ha Noi 10000, 
Vietnam.
(8)International Master/Ph.D. Program in Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei City 110, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei City 110, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, Wan-Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei City 106, Taiwan.
(11)Professional Master Program in Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(12)Research Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(13)Translational Imaging Research Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital, 
Taipei 110, Taiwan.

The requesting of detailed information on new drugs including drug-drug 
interactions or targets is often unavailable and resource-intensive in assessing 
adverse drug events. To shorten the common evaluation process of drug-drug 
interactions, we present a machine learning framework-HAINI to predict DDI types 
for histamine antagonist drugs using simplified molecular-input line-entry 
systems (SMILES) combined with interaction features based on CYP450 group as 
inputs. The data used in our research consisted of approved drugs of histamine 
antagonists that are connected to 26,344 DDI pairs from the DrugBank database. 
Various classification algorithms such as Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, Random 
Forest, Logistic Regression, and XGBoost were used with 5-fold cross-validation 
to approach a large-scale DDIs prediction among histamine antagonist drugs. The 
prediction performance shows that our model outperformed previously published 
works on DDI prediction with the best precision of 0.788, a recall of 0.921, and 
an F1-score of 0.838 among 19 given DDIs types. An important finding of the 
study is that our prediction is based solely on the SMILES and CYP450 and thus 
can be applied at the early stage of drug development.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113092
PMCID: PMC8621088
PMID: 34831315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


54. JMIR Med Inform. 2021 Oct 25;9(10):e32730. doi: 10.2196/32730.

Adverse Drug Event Prediction Using Noisy Literature-Derived Knowledge Graphs: 
Algorithm Development and Validation.

Dasgupta S(1), Jayagopal A(2), Jun Hong AL(2), Mariappan R(2), Rajan V(3).

Author information:
(1)Mallya Aditi International School, Bangalore, India.
(2)School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Information Systems and Analytics, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug events (ADEs) are unintended side effects of drugs that 
cause substantial clinical and economic burdens globally. Not all ADEs are 
discovered during clinical trials; therefore, postmarketing surveillance, called 
pharmacovigilance, is routinely conducted to find unknown ADEs. A wealth of 
information, which facilitates ADE discovery, lies in the growing body of 
biomedical literature. Knowledge graphs (KGs) encode information from the 
literature, where the vertices and the edges represent clinical concepts and 
their relations, respectively. The scale and unstructured form of the literature 
necessitates the use of natural language processing (NLP) to automatically 
create such KGs. Previous studies have demonstrated the utility of such 
literature-derived KGs in ADE prediction. Through unsupervised learning of the 
representations (features) of clinical concepts from the KG, which are used in 
machine learning models, state-of-the-art results for ADE prediction were 
obtained on benchmark data sets.
OBJECTIVE: Due to the use of NLP to infer literature-derived KGs, there is noise 
in the form of false positive (erroneous) and false negative (absent) nodes and 
edges. Previous representation learning methods do not account for such 
inaccuracies in the graph. NLP algorithms can quantify the confidence in their 
inference of extracted concepts and relations from the literature. Our 
hypothesis, which motivates this work, is that by using such confidence scores 
during representation learning, the learned embeddings would yield better 
features for ADE prediction models.
METHODS: We developed methods to use these confidence scores on two well-known 
representation learning methods-DeepWalk and Translating Embeddings for Modeling 
Multi-relational Data (TransE)-to develop their weighted versions: Weighted 
DeepWalk and Weighted TransE. These methods were used to learn representations 
from a large literature-derived KG, the Semantic MEDLINE Database, which 
contains more than 93 million clinical relations. They were compared with 
Embedding of Semantic Predications, which, to our knowledge, is the best 
reported representation learning method using the Semantic MEDLINE Database with 
state-of-the-art results for ADE prediction. Representations learned from 
different methods were used (separately) as features of drugs and diseases to 
build classification models for ADE prediction using benchmark data sets. The 
methods were compared rigorously over multiple cross-validation settings.
RESULTS: The weighted versions we designed were able to learn representations 
that yielded more accurate predictive models than the corresponding unweighted 
versions of both DeepWalk and TransE, as well as Embedding of Semantic 
Predications, in our experiments. There were performance improvements of up to 
5.75% in the F1-score and 8.4% in the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve value, thus advancing the state of the art in ADE 
prediction from literature-derived KGs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our classification models can be used to aid pharmacovigilance 
teams in detecting potentially new ADEs. Our experiments demonstrate the 
importance of modeling inaccuracies in the inferred KGs for representation 
learning.

©Soham Dasgupta, Aishwarya Jayagopal, Abel Lim Jun Hong, Ragunathan Mariappan, 
Vaibhav Rajan. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(https://medinform.jmir.org), 25.10.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/32730
PMCID: PMC8576589
PMID: 34694230

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


55. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2021 Mar;97(3):665-673. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13802. Epub 2020 
Oct 16.

Predicting adverse drug reactions of two-drug combinations using structural and 
transcriptomic drug representations to train an artificial neural network.

Shankar S(1), Bhandari I(2), Okou DT(3), Srinivasa G(2), Athri P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Amrita School of Engineering, 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Bengaluru, India.
(2)PES Center for Pattern Recognition, Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, PES University, Bengaluru, India.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are pharmacological events triggered by drug 
interactions with various sources of origin including drug-drug interactions. 
While there are many computational studies that explore models to predict ADRs 
originating from single drugs, only a few of them explore models that predict 
ADRs from drug combinations. Further, as far as we know, none of them have 
developed models using transcriptomic data, specifically the LINCS L1000 
drug-induced gene expression data to predict ADRs for drug combinations. In this 
study, we use the TWOSIDES database as a source of ADRs originating from 
two-drug combinations. 34,549 common drug pairs between these two databases were 
used to train an artificial neural network (ANN), to predict 243 ADRs that were 
induced by at least 10% of the drug pairs. Our model predicts the occurrence of 
these ADRs with an average accuracy of 82% across a multifold cross-validation.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13802
PMID: 33006799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Oct 21;23(10):e27714. doi: 10.2196/27714.

Quantifying the Severity of Adverse Drug Reactions Using Social Media: Network 
Analysis.

Lavertu A(1)(2), Hamamsy T(3), Altman RB(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Training Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
United States.
(3)Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY, United States.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) affect the health of hundreds of 
thousands of individuals annually in the United States, with associated costs of 
hundreds of billions of dollars. The monitoring and analysis of the severity of 
ADRs is limited by the current qualitative and categorical systems of severity 
classification. Previous efforts have generated quantitative estimates for a 
subset of ADRs but were limited in scope because of the time and costs 
associated with the efforts.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to increase the number of ADRs for which 
there are quantitative severity estimates while improving the quality of these 
severity estimates.
METHODS: We present a semisupervised approach that estimates ADR severity by 
using social media word embeddings to construct a lexical network of ADRs and 
perform label propagation. We used this method to estimate the severity of 
28,113 ADRs, representing 12,198 unique ADR concepts from the Medical Dictionary 
for Regulatory Activities.
RESULTS: Our Severity of Adverse Events Derived from Reddit (SAEDR) scores have 
good correlations with real-world outcomes. The SAEDR scores had Spearman 
correlations of 0.595, 0.633, and -0.748 for death, serious outcome, and no 
outcome, respectively, with ADR case outcomes in the Food and Drug 
Administration Adverse Event Reporting System. We investigated different methods 
for defining initial seed term sets and evaluated their impact on the severity 
estimates. We analyzed severity distributions for ADRs based on their appearance 
in boxed warning drug label sections, as well as for ADRs with sex-specific 
associations. We found that ADRs discovered in the postmarketing period had 
significantly greater severity than those discovered during the clinical trial 
(P<.001). We created quantitative drug-risk profile (DRIP) scores for 968 drugs 
that had a Spearman correlation of 0.377 with drugs ranked by the Food and Drug 
Administration Adverse Event Reporting System cases resulting in death, where 
the given drug was the primary suspect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our SAEDR and DRIP scores are well correlated with the real-world 
outcomes of the entities they represent and have demonstrated utility in 
pharmacovigilance research. We make the SAEDR scores for 12,198 ADRs and the 
DRIP scores for 968 drugs publicly available to enable more quantitative 
analysis of pharmacovigilance data.

©Adam Lavertu, Tymor Hamamsy, Russ B Altman. Originally published in the Journal 
of Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 21.10.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/27714
PMCID: PMC8569532
PMID: 34673524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


57. Curr Drug Saf. 2022 Apr 5. doi: 10.2174/1574886317666220405115548. Online ahead 
of print.

Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacovigilance and Covid-19.

Bhardwaj K(1), Alam R(1), Pandeya A(2), Sharma PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Raj Kumar Goel Institute of Technology (Pharmacy), 5-Km. Stone, Delhi-Meerut 
Road, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Graphic Era University, Bellroad, Clement town, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India.

The history of pharmacovigilance started back 169 years ago with the death of a 
15-year-old girl, Hannah greener. However, the Thalidomide incident of 1961 
brought a sharp change in the pharmacovigilance process, with adverse drug 
reaction reporting being systematic, spontaneous, and regulated timely. 
Therefore, continuous monitoring of marketed drugs was essential to ensure the 
safety of public health. Any observed adverse drug reaction detected by signals 
was to be reported by the health profession. Moreover, signal detection became 
the primary goal of pharmacovigilance generate based on reported cases. Among 
various methods used for signal detection, the Spontaneous Reporting System was 
most widely preferred; although, it had the limitation of "under-reporting". 
Gradually, the world health organization collaborating centre and "Uppsala 
Monitoring Centre" was established in 1978 for international monitoring of drug. 
The centre was responsible for operating various databases like vigiflow, 
vigibase, vigilyze, and vigiaccess. Recently, huge data could be generated 
through spontaneous reporting linked with computational methods such as Bayesian 
Framework, E-Synthesis. Furthermore, drug safety surveillance at an early stage 
prior to the official alerts or regulatory changes was made possible through 
social media. In addition, India created a National Pharmacovigilance Program, 
and Schedule Y of the Drug and Cosmetic Act 1945 was reviewed and amended in 
2005. The collaboration of Information Technology and Pharmaceutical Company can 
further enhance the awareness regarding artificial intelligence in 
pharmacovigilance, which was in its infancy until 2017. Artificial intelligence 
helps improve the quality and accuracy of information much quicker.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1574886317666220405115548
PMID: 35382726


58. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2018;21(5):314-322. doi: 
10.2174/1386207321666180524110013.

Molecular Docking for Prediction and Interpretation of Adverse Drug Reactions.

Luo H(1), Fokoue-Nkoutche A(2), Singh N(1)(3), Yang L(4), Hu J(1), Zhang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Health, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown 
Heights, NY 10598, United States.
(2)Cognitive Computing, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 
10598, United States.
(3)Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States.
(4)Bio-X Institutes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.

AIM AND OBJECTIVE: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) present a major burden for 
patients and the healthcare industry. Various computational methods have been 
developed to predict ADRs for drug molecules. However, many of these methods 
require experimental or surveillance data and cannot be used when only 
structural information is available.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We collected 1,231 small molecule drugs and 600 human 
proteins and utilized molecular docking to generate binding features among them. 
We developed machine learning models that use these docking features to make 
predictions for 1,533 ADRs.
RESULTS: These models obtain an overall area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.843 and an overall area under the 
precision-recall curve (AUPR) of 0.395, outperforming seven structural 
fingerprint-based prediction models. Using the method, we predicted skin striae 
for fluticasone propionate, dermatitis acneiform for mometasone, and decreased 
libido for irinotecan, as demonstrations. Furthermore, we analyzed the top 
binding proteins associated with some of the ADRs, which can help to understand 
and/or generate hypotheses for underlying mechanisms of ADRs.
CONCLUSION: Machine learning combined with molecular docking can help to predict 
ADRs for drug molecules and provide possible explanations for the ADR 
mechanisms.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1386207321666180524110013
PMID: 29792141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Patterns (N Y). 2020 Oct 9;1(7):100108. doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2020.100108. Epub 
2020 Sep 22.

Using Machine Learning to Identify Adverse Drug Effects Posing Increased Risk to 
Women.

Chandak P(1), Tatonetti NP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10027, USA.
(3)Lead Contact.

Adverse drug reactions are the fourth leading cause of death in the US. Although 
women take longer to metabolize medications and experience twice the risk of 
developing adverse reactions compared with men, these sex differences are not 
comprehensively understood. Real-world clinical data provide an opportunity to 
estimate safety effects in otherwise understudied populations, i.e., women. 
These data, however, are subject to confounding biases and correlated 
covariates. We present AwareDX, a pharmacovigilance algorithm that leverages 
advances in machine learning to predict sex risks. Our algorithm mitigates these 
biases and quantifies the differential risk of a drug causing an adverse event 
in either men or women. AwareDX demonstrates high precision during validation 
against clinical literature and pharmacogenetic mechanisms. We present a 
resource of 20,817 adverse drug effects posing sex-specific risks. AwareDX, and 
this resource, present an opportunity to minimize adverse events by tailoring 
drug prescription and dosage to sex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patter.2020.100108
PMCID: PMC7654817
PMID: 33179017

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.


60. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2020 Jul 2. doi: 10.2174/1389203721666200702145701. 
Online ahead of print.

A Survey of Network Embedding for Drug Analysis and Prediction.

Liu Z(1), Chen Q(2), Lan W(2), Liang J(3), Chen YP(4), Chen B(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical, Guangxi University, Nanning. China.
(2)School of Computer, Electronic and Information, Guangxi University, Nanning. 
China.
(3)School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Beibu Gulf University, 
Qinzhou. China.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe 
University, Melbourne. Australia.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-bioresources, Guangxi University, Nanning. China.

Traditional network-based computational methods have shown good results in drug 
analysis and prediction. However, these methods are time consuming and lack 
universality, and it is difficult to exploit the auxiliary information of nodes 
and edges. Network embedding provides a promising way for alleviating the above 
problems by transforming network into a low-dimensional space while preserving 
network structure and auxiliary information. This thus facilitates the 
application of machine learning algorithms for subsequent processing. Network 
embedding has been introduced into drug analysis and prediction in the last few 
years, and has shown superior performance over traditional methods. However, 
there is no systematic review of this issue. This article offers a comprehensive 
survey of the primary network embedding methods and their applications in drug 
analysis and prediction. The network embedding technologies applied in 
homogeneous network and heterogeneous network are investigated and compared, 
including matrix decomposition, random walk, and deep learning. Especially, the 
Graph neural network (GNN) methods in deep learning are highlighted. Further, 
the applications of network embedding in drug similarity estimation, drug-target 
interaction prediction, adverse drug reactions prediction, protein function and 
therapeutic peptides prediction are discussed. Several future potential research 
directions are also discussed.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203721666200702145701
PMID: 32614745


61. Drug Discov Today. 2019 Jul;24(7):1332-1343. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2019.03.003. 
Epub 2019 Mar 12.

Machine learning on adverse drug reactions for pharmacovigilance.

Lee CY(1), Chen YP(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Science, Health and Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(2)College of Science, Health and Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne, 
Australia. Electronic address: phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au.

Machine learning, especially deep learning, has the predictive power to predict 
adverse drug reactions, repurpose drugs and perform precision medicine. We 
provide a background of machine learning and propose a potential 
high-performance deep learning framework for its successful applications in 
these practices.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2019.03.003
PMID: 30876845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2021 Aug;9(8):3015-3020. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.02.005. Epub 2021 Feb 16.

Drug Allergy Labels Lost in Translation: From Patient to Charts and Backwards.

Ramsey A(1), Macy E(2), Chiriac AM(3), Blumenthal KG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy/Immunology/Rheumatology, Rochester Regional Health, 
Rochester, NY; Department of Allergy/Immunology/Rheumatology, University of 
Rochester, Rochester, NY. Electronic address: 
allison.ramsey@rochesterregional.org.
(2)Allergy Department, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, San Diego, Calif.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, Division of Allergy, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 
University Hospital of Montpellier, Montpellier, France; IDESP, INSERM, 
University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass; Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and 
Immunology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass; Mongan Institute, 
Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass.

The current method of defining, reporting, assessment, labeling, delabeling, and 
reconciliation of adverse drug reactions (ADRs), and specifically 
immunologically mediated drug hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs), in electronic 
health records (EHRs) is inadequate and compromises care quality and safety. It 
is critical to accurately and succinctly report the signs and symptoms 
associated with ADRs and suspected HSRs to enable clinicians to determine the 
plausible reaction type and help guide appropriate future management plans. 
Despite the current limitations of the EHR allergy module, we must encourage 
improved clinical documentation and demand technological improvements. 
Telehealth methods have been shown to be valuable in the assessment of ADRs and 
HSRs, particularly in the case of penicillin allergy evaluation and delabeling. 
The implementation, assessment, and refinement of advanced technologies, 
including clinical informatics and artificial intelligence, along with continued 
education of health care providers have potential to improve EHR documentation 
and communication, thereby advancing patient safety efforts.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.02.005
PMID: 33607342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):449-458. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01172-5. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Intelligent Telehealth in Pharmacovigilance: A Future Perspective.

Edrees H(1)(2)(3), Song W(1)(3), Syrowatka A(1)(3), Simona A(1)(3), Amato MG(1), 
Bates DW(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, MCPHS University, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, 1620 Tremont St., 3rd Floor, Boston, MA, 02120, USA.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA. dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.
(5)Harvard Medical School, 1620 Tremont St., 3rd Floor, Boston, MA, 02120, USA. 
dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA. dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.

Pharmacovigilance improves patient safety by detecting and preventing adverse 
drug events. However, challenges exist that limit adverse drug event detection, 
resulting in many adverse drug events being underreported or inaccurately 
reported. One challenge includes having access to large data sets from various 
sources including electronic health records and wearable medical devices. 
Artificial intelligence, including machine learning methods, such as natural 
language processing and deep learning, can detect and extract information about 
adverse drug events, thus automating the pharmacovigilance process and improving 
the surveillance of known and documented adverse drug events. In addition, with 
the increased demand for telehealth services, for managing both acute and 
chronic diseases, artificial intelligence methods can play a role in detecting 
and preventing adverse drug events. In this review, we discuss two use cases of 
how artificial intelligence methods may be useful to improve the quality of 
pharmacovigilance and the role of artificial intelligence in telehealth 
practices.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01172-5
PMCID: PMC9112241
PMID: 35579810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: David W. Bates reports grants and personal fees 
from EarlySense, personal fees from CDI Negev, equity from ValeraHealth, equity 
from Clew, equity from MDClone, personal fees and equity from AESOP, personal 
fees and equity from Feelbetter, and grants from IBM Watson Health, outside the 
submitted work. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.


64. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Dec 20;12:794205. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.794205. 
eCollection 2021.

Prediction of the Drug-Drug Interaction Types with the Unified Embedding 
Features from Drug Similarity Networks.

Yan XY(1), Yin PW(1), Wu XM(2), Han JX(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science, Xi'an Shiyou University, Xi'an, China.
(2)School of Electronic Engineering, Xi'an Shiyou University, Xi'an, China.

Drug combination therapies are a promising strategy to overcome drug resistance 
and improve the efficacy of monotherapy in cancer, and it has been shown to lead 
to a decrease in dose-related toxicities. Except the synergistic reaction 
between drugs, some antagonistic drug-drug interactions (DDIs) exist, which is 
the main cause of adverse drug events. Precisely predicting the type of DDI is 
important for both drug development and more effective drug combination therapy 
applications. Recently, numerous text mining- and machine learning-based methods 
have been developed for predicting DDIs. All these methods implicitly utilize 
the feature of drugs from diverse drug-related properties. However, how to 
integrate these features more efficiently and improve the accuracy of 
classification is still a challenge. In this paper, we proposed a novel method 
(called NMDADNN) to predict the DDI types by integrating five drug-related 
heterogeneous information sources to extract the unified drug mapping features. 
NMDADNN first constructs the similarity networks by using the Jaccard 
coefficient and then implements random walk with restart algorithm and positive 
pointwise mutual information for extracting the topological similarities. After 
that, five network-based similarities are unified by using a multimodel deep 
autoencoder. Finally, NMDADNN implements the deep neural network (DNN) on the 
unified drug feature to infer the types of DDIs. In comparison with other recent 
state-of-the-art DNN-based methods, NMDADNN achieves the best results in terms 
of accuracy, area under the precision-recall curve, area under the ROC curve, F1 
score, precision and recall. In addition, many of the promising types of 
drug-drug pairs predicted by NMDADNN are also confirmed by using the 
interactions checker tool. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our 
NMDADNN method, indicating that NMDADNN has the great potential for predicting 
DDI types.

Copyright © 2021 Yan, Yin, Wu and Han.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.794205
PMCID: PMC8721167
PMID: 34987405

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


65. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):13-21. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz063.

A study of deep learning approaches for medication and adverse drug event 
extraction from clinical text.

Wei Q(1), Ji Z(1), Li Z(2), Du J(1), Wang J(1), Xu J(1), Xiang Y(1), Tiryaki 
F(1), Wu S(1), Zhang Y(1), Tao C(1), Xu H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, China.

OBJECTIVE: This article presents our approaches to extraction of medications and 
associated adverse drug events (ADEs) from clinical documents, which is the 
second track of the 2018 National NLP Clinical Challenges (n2c2) shared task.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The clinical corpus used in this study was from the 
MIMIC-III database and the organizers annotated 303 documents for training and 
202 for testing. Our system consists of 2 components: a named entity recognition 
(NER) and a relation classification (RC) component. For each component, we 
implemented deep learning-based approaches (eg, BI-LSTM-CRF) and compared them 
with traditional machine learning approaches, namely, conditional random fields 
for NER and support vector machines for RC, respectively. In addition, we 
developed a deep learning-based joint model that recognizes ADEs and their 
relations to medications in 1 step using a sequence labeling approach. To 
further improve the performance, we also investigated different ensemble 
approaches to generating optimal performance by combining outputs from multiple 
approaches.
RESULTS: Our best-performing systems achieved F1 scores of 93.45% for NER, 
96.30% for RC, and 89.05% for end-to-end evaluation, which ranked #2, #1, and #1 
among all participants, respectively. Additional evaluations show that the deep 
learning-based approaches did outperform traditional machine learning algorithms 
in both NER and RC. The joint model that simultaneously recognizes ADEs and 
their relations to medications also achieved the best performance on RC, 
indicating its promise for relation extraction.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we developed deep learning approaches for extracting 
medications and their attributes such as ADEs, and demonstrated its superior 
performance compared with traditional machine learning algorithms, indicating 
its uses in broader NER and RC tasks in the medical domain.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz063
PMCID: PMC6913210
PMID: 31135882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Bioinformatics. 2021 Mar 15:btab169. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab169. Online 
ahead of print.

MUFFIN: Multi-Scale Feature Fusion for Drug-Drug Interaction Prediction.

Chen Y(1), Ma T(1), Yang X(1), Wang J(1), Song B(1), Zeng X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, 
410012, China.

MOTIVATION: Adverse drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are crucial for drug research 
and mainly cause morbidity and mortality. Thus, the identification of potential 
DDIs is essential for doctors, patients, and the society. Existing traditional 
machine learning models rely heavily on handcraft features and lack 
generalization. Recently, the deep learning approaches that can automatically 
learn drug features from the molecular graph or drug-related network have 
improved the ability of computational models to predict unknown DDIs. However, 
previous works utilized large labeled data and merely considered the structure 
or sequence information of drugs without considering the relations or 
topological information between drug and other biomedical objects (e.g., gene, 
disease, and pathway), or considered knowledge graph (KG) without considering 
the information from the drug molecular structure.
RESULTS: Accordingly, to effectively explore the joint effect of drug molecular 
structure and semantic information of drugs in knowledge graph for DDI 
prediction, we propose a multi-scale feature fusion deep learning model named 
MUFFIN. MUFFIN can jointly learn the drug representation based on both the 
drug-self structure information and the KG with rich bio-medical information. In 
MUFFIN, we designed a bi-level cross strategy that includes cross- and 
scalar-level components to fuse multi-modal features well. MUFFIN can alleviate 
the restriction of limited labeled data on deep learning models by crossing the 
features learned from large-scale KG and drug molecular graph. We evaluated our 
approach on three datasets and three different tasks including binary-class, 
multi-class, and multi-label DDI prediction tasks. The results showed that 
MUFFIN outperformed other state-of-the-art baselines.
AVAILABILITY: The source code and data are available at 
https://github.com/xzenglab/MUFFIN.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights 
reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab169
PMID: 33720331


67. Biomed Res Int. 2020 May 19;2020:4795140. doi: 10.1155/2020/4795140. eCollection 
2020.

Machine-Learning Prediction of Oral Drug-Induced Liver Injury (DILI) via 
Multiple Features and Endpoints.

Liu X(1)(2), Zheng D(3), Zhong Y(3), Xia Z(1)(2), Luo H(2), Weng Z(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Burns, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)The Centre for Big Data Research in Burns and Trauma, Fuzhou University, 
Fujian Province, China.
(3)College of Biological Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fujian 
Province, China.

Drug discovery is a costly process which usually takes more than 10 years and 
billions of dollars for one successful drug to enter the market. Despite all the 
safety tests, drugs may still cause adverse reactions and be restricted in use 
or even withdrawn from the market. Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is one of 
the major adverse drug reactions, and computational models may be used to 
predict and reduce it. To assess the computational prediction performance of 
DILI, we curated DILI endpoints from three databases and prepared drug features 
including chemical descriptors, therapeutic classifications, gene expressions, 
and binding proteins. We trained machine-learning models to predict the various 
DILI endpoints using different drug features. Using the optimal feature sets, 
the top-performing models obtained areas under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) around 0.8 for some DILI endpoints. We found that 
some features, including therapeutic classifications and proteins, have good 
prediction performance towards DILI. We also discovered that the severity of 
DILI endpoints as well as the selection of negative samples may significantly 
affect the prediction results. Overall, our study provided a comprehensive 
collection, curation, and prediction of DILI endpoints using various drug 
features, which may help the drug researchers to better understand and prevent 
DILI during the drug discovery process.

Copyright © 2020 Xiaobin Liu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4795140
PMCID: PMC7254069
PMID: 32509859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.


68. NPJ Digit Med. 2021 Mar 19;4(1):54. doi: 10.1038/s41746-021-00423-6.

The potential of artificial intelligence to improve patient safety: a scoping 
review.

Bates DW(1)(2)(3), Levine D(4)(5), Syrowatka A(4)(5), Kuznetsova M(6), Craig 
KJT(7), Rui A(4), Jackson GP(7)(8), Rhee K(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA. dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.
(3)Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. 
dbates@bwh.harvard.edu.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Harvard Business School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, USA.

Artificial intelligence (AI) represents a valuable tool that could be used to 
improve the safety of care. Major adverse events in healthcare include: 
healthcare-associated infections, adverse drug events, venous thromboembolism, 
surgical complications, pressure ulcers, falls, decompensation, and diagnostic 
errors. The objective of this scoping review was to summarize the relevant 
literature and evaluate the potential of AI to improve patient safety in these 
eight harm domains. A structured search was used to query MEDLINE for relevant 
articles. The scoping review identified studies that described the application 
of AI for prediction, prevention, or early detection of adverse events in each 
of the harm domains. The AI literature was narratively synthesized for each 
domain, and findings were considered in the context of incidence, cost, and 
preventability to make projections about the likelihood of AI improving safety. 
Three-hundred and ninety-two studies were included in the scoping review. The 
literature provided numerous examples of how AI has been applied within each of 
the eight harm domains using various techniques. The most common novel data were 
collected using different types of sensing technologies: vital sign monitoring, 
wearables, pressure sensors, and computer vision. There are significant 
opportunities to leverage AI and novel data sources to reduce the frequency of 
harm across all domains. We expect AI to have the greatest impact in areas where 
current strategies are not effective, and integration and complex analysis of 
novel, unstructured data are necessary to make accurate predictions; this 
applies specifically to adverse drug events, decompensation, and diagnostic 
errors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41746-021-00423-6
PMCID: PMC7979747
PMID: 33742085

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Bates consults for EarlySense, which makes 
patient safety monitoring systems. He receives cash compensation from CDI 
(Negev), Ltd, which is a not-for-profit incubator for health IT startups. He 
receives equity from ValeraHealth, which makes software to help patients with 
chronic diseases. He receives equity from Clew, which makes software to support 
clinical decision-making in intensive care. He receives equity from MDClone, 
which takes clinical data and produces deidentified versions of it. He receives 
equity from AESOP, which makes software to reduce medication error rates. Drs. 
Craig, Jackson, and Rhee are all employed by IBM Watson Health. The other 
coauthors have no disclosures.


69. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2021 Aug;175:113804. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.05.014. Epub 
2021 May 18.

Let's talk about sex: Differences in drug therapy in males and females.

Madla CM(1), Gavins FKH(1), Merchant HA(2), Orlu M(1), Murdan S(1), Basit AW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, UCL School of Pharmacy, University College 
London, 29 - 39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of 
Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield HD1 3DH, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, UCL School of Pharmacy, University College 
London, 29 - 39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: a.basit@ucl.ac.uk.

Professor Henry Higgins in My Fair Lady said, 'Why can't a woman be more like a 
man?' Perhaps unintended, such narration extends to the reality of current drug 
development. A clear sex-gap exists in pharmaceutical research spanning from 
preclinical studies, clinical trials to post-marketing surveillance with a bias 
towards males. Consequently, women experience adverse drug reactions from 
approved drug products more often than men. Distinct differences in 
pharmaceutical response across drug classes and the lack of understanding of 
disease pathophysiology also exists between the sexes, often leading to 
suboptimal drug therapy in women. This review explores the influence of sex as a 
biological variable in drug delivery, pharmacokinetic response and overall 
efficacy in the context of pharmaceutical research and practice in the clinic. 
Prospective recommendations are provided to guide researchers towards the 
consideration of sex differences in methodologies and analyses. The promotion of 
disaggregating data according to sex to strengthen scientific rigour, 
encouraging innovation through the personalisation of medicines and adopting 
machine learning algorithms is vital for optimised drug development in the sexes 
and population health equity.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2021.05.014
PMID: 34015416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


70. J Cheminform. 2018 Aug 13;10(1):37. doi: 10.1186/s13321-018-0290-y.

Annotation and detection of drug effects in text for pharmacovigilance.

Thompson P(1), Daikou S(2), Ueno K(3), Batista-Navarro R(2), Tsujii J(2)(3), 
Ananiadou S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, School of Computer Science, Manchester 
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, 
Manchester, M1 7DN, UK. paul.thompson@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)National Centre for Text Mining, School of Computer Science, Manchester 
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, 
Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.
(3)Artificial Intelligence Research Center, National Research and Development 
Agency (AIST), Tokyo Waterfront 2-3-2 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-0064, Japan.

Pharmacovigilance (PV) databases record the benefits and risks of different 
drugs, as a means to ensure their safe and effective use. Creating and 
maintaining such resources can be complex, since a particular medication may 
have divergent effects in different individuals, due to specific patient 
characteristics and/or interactions with other drugs being administered. Textual 
information from various sources can provide important evidence to curators of 
PV databases about the usage and effects of drug targets in different medical 
subjects. However, the efficient identification of relevant evidence can be 
challenging, due to the increasing volume of textual data. Text mining (TM) 
techniques can support curators by automatically detecting complex information, 
such as interactions between drugs, diseases and adverse effects. This semantic 
information supports the quick identification of documents containing 
information of interest (e.g., the different types of patients in which a given 
adverse drug reaction has been observed to occur). TM tools are typically 
adapted to different domains by applying machine learning methods to corpora 
that are manually labelled by domain experts using annotation guidelines to 
ensure consistency. We present a semantically annotated corpus of 597 MEDLINE 
abstracts, PHAEDRA, encoding rich information on drug effects and their 
interactions, whose quality is assured through the use of detailed annotation 
guidelines and the demonstration of high levels of inter-annotator agreement 
(e.g., 92.6% F-Score for identifying named entities and 78.4% F-Score for 
identifying complex events, when relaxed matching criteria are applied). To our 
knowledge, the corpus is unique in the domain of PV, according to the level of 
detail of its annotations. To illustrate the utility of the corpus, we have 
trained TM tools based on its rich labels to recognise drug effects in text 
automatically. The corpus and annotation guidelines are available at: 
http://www.nactem.ac.uk/PHAEDRA/ .

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-018-0290-y
PMCID: PMC6089860
PMID: 30105604


71. Curr Drug Saf. 2008 May;3(2):100-14. doi: 10.2174/157488608784529224.

Advances in machine learning prediction of toxicological properties and adverse 
drug reactions of pharmaceutical agents.

Ma XH(1), Wang R, Xue Y, Li ZR, Yang SY, Wei YQ, Chen YZ.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Drug Design Group, Department of Computational Science, 
National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 2, Singapore.

As part of the intensive efforts in facilitating drug discovery, computational 
methods have been explored as low-cost and efficient tools for predicting 
various toxicological properties and adverse drug reactions (ADR) of 
pharmaceutical agents. More recently, machine learning methods have been applied 
for developing tools capable of predicting diverse spectrum of compounds of 
different toxicological properties and ADR profiles. Based on the results of a 
number of studies, these methods have shown promising potential in predicting a 
variety of toxicological properties and ADR profiles. This article reviews the 
strategies, current progresses, underlying difficulties and future prospects in 
using machine learning methods for predicting compounds of specific 
toxicological property or ADR profile.

DOI: 10.2174/157488608784529224
PMID: 18690988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):39-46. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz101.

Adverse drug events and medication relation extraction in electronic health 
records with ensemble deep learning methods.

Christopoulou F(1)(2), Tran TT(1)(2), Sahu SK(1), Miwa M(2)(3), Ananiadou 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, School of Computer Science, The University 
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Artificial Intelligence Research Centre, National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Toyota Technological Institute, Nagoya, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Identification of drugs, associated medication entities, and 
interactions among them are crucial to prevent unwanted effects of drug therapy, 
known as adverse drug events. This article describes our participation to the 
n2c2 shared-task in extracting relations between medication-related entities in 
electronic health records.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We proposed an ensemble approach for relation extraction 
and classification between drugs and medication-related entities. We 
incorporated state-of-the-art named-entity recognition (NER) models based on 
bidirectional long short-term memory (BiLSTM) networks and conditional random 
fields (CRF) for end-to-end extraction. We additionally developed separate 
models for intra- and inter-sentence relation extraction and combined them using 
an ensemble method. The intra-sentence models rely on bidirectional long 
short-term memory networks and attention mechanisms and are able to capture 
dependencies between multiple related pairs in the same sentence. For the 
inter-sentence relations, we adopted a neural architecture that utilizes the 
Transformer network to improve performance in longer sequences.
RESULTS: Our team ranked third with a micro-averaged F1 score of 94.72% and 
87.65% for relation and end-to-end relation extraction, respectively (Tracks 2 
and 3). Our ensemble effectively takes advantages from our proposed models. 
Analysis of the reported results indicated that our proposed approach is more 
generalizable than the top-performing system, which employs additional training 
data- and corpus-driven processing techniques.
CONCLUSIONS: We proposed a relation extraction system to identify relations 
between drugs and medication-related entities. The proposed approach is 
independent of external syntactic tools. Analysis showed that by using latent 
Drug-Drug interactions we were able to significantly improve the performance of 
non-Drug-Drug pairs in EHRs.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz101
PMCID: PMC6913215
PMID: 31390003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Front Genet. 2018 Jul 31;9:248. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00248. eCollection 2018.

Prediction of Drug-Gene Interaction by Using Metapath2vec.

Zhu S(1), Bing J(1), Min X(1), Lin C(1), Zeng X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Departamento de Inteligencia Artificial, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.

Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) currently play an important role in 
daily life. HINs are applied in many fields, such as science research, 
e-commerce, recommendation systems, and bioinformatics. Particularly, HINs have 
been used in biomedical research. Algorithms have been proposed to calculate the 
correlations between drugs and targets and between diseases and genes. Recently, 
the interaction between drugs and human genes has become an important subject in 
the research on drug efficacy and human genomics. In previous studies, numerous 
prediction methods using machine learning and statistical prediction models were 
proposed to explore this interaction on the biological network. In the current 
work, we introduce a representation learning method into the biological 
heterogeneous network and use the representation learning models metapath2vec 
and metapath2vec++ on our dataset. We combine the adverse drug reaction (ADR) 
data in the drug-gene network with causal relationship between drugs and ADRs. 
This article first presents an analysis of the importance of predicting 
drug-gene relationships and discusses the existing prediction methods. Second, 
the skip-gram model commonly used in representation learning for natural 
language processing tasks is explained. Third, the metapath2vec and 
metapath2vec++ models for the example of drug-gene-ADR network are described. 
Next, the kernelized Bayesian matrix factorization algorithm is used to complete 
the prediction. Finally, the experimental results of both models are compared 
with Katz, CATAPULT, and matrix factorization, the prediction visualized using 
the receiver operating characteristic curves are presented, and the area under 
the receiver operating characteristic values for three varying algorithm 
parameters are calculated.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00248
PMCID: PMC6079268
PMID: 30108606


74. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 19;16(11):e0260315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260315. 
eCollection 2021.

Detection of overdose and underdose prescriptions-An unsupervised machine 
learning approach.

Nagata K(1), Tsuji T(1), Suetsugu K(1), Muraoka K(1), Watanabe H(2), Kanaya 
A(1), Egashira N(1), Ieiri I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Fukuoka Tokushukai Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

Overdose prescription errors sometimes cause serious life-threatening adverse 
drug events, while underdose errors lead to diminished therapeutic effects. 
Therefore, it is important to detect and prevent these errors. In the present 
study, we used the one-class support vector machine (OCSVM), one of the most 
common unsupervised machine learning algorithms for anomaly detection, to 
identify overdose and underdose prescriptions. We extracted prescription data 
from electronic health records in Kyushu University Hospital between January 1, 
2014 and December 31, 2019. We constructed an OCSVM model for each of the 21 
candidate drugs using three features: age, weight, and dose. Clinical overdose 
and underdose prescriptions, which were identified and rectified by pharmacists 
before administration, were collected. Synthetic overdose and underdose 
prescriptions were created using the maximum and minimum doses, defined by drug 
labels or the UpToDate database. We applied these prescription data to the OCSVM 
model and evaluated its detection performance. We also performed comparative 
analysis with other unsupervised outlier detection algorithms (local outlier 
factor, isolation forest, and robust covariance). Twenty-seven out of 31 
clinical overdose and underdose prescriptions (87.1%) were detected as abnormal 
by the model. The constructed OCSVM models showed high performance for detecting 
synthetic overdose prescriptions (precision 0.986, recall 0.964, and F-measure 
0.973) and synthetic underdose prescriptions (precision 0.980, recall 0.794, and 
F-measure 0.839). In comparative analysis, OCSVM showed the best performance. 
Our models detected the majority of clinical overdose and underdose 
prescriptions and demonstrated high performance in synthetic data analysis. 
OCSVM models, constructed using features such as age, weight, and dose, are 
useful for detecting overdose and underdose prescriptions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260315
PMCID: PMC8604308
PMID: 34797894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


75. JMIR Med Inform. 2021 May 5;9(5):e24678. doi: 10.2196/24678.

Extracting Drug Names and Associated Attributes From Discharge Summaries: Text 
Mining Study.

Alfattni G(1)(2), Belousov M(1), Peek N(3)(4)(5), Nenadic G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Jamoum University College, Umm Al-Qura 
University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Centre for Health Informatics, Division of Informatics, Imaging and Data 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)National Institute of Health Research Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
(5)The Alan Turing Institute, Manchester, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Drug prescriptions are often recorded in free-text clinical 
narratives; making this information available in a structured form is important 
to support many health-related tasks. Although several natural language 
processing (NLP) methods have been proposed to extract such information, many 
challenges remain.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluates the feasibility of using NLP and deep learning 
approaches for extracting and linking drug names and associated attributes 
identified in clinical free-text notes and presents an extensive error analysis 
of different methods. This study initiated with the participation in the 2018 
National NLP Clinical Challenges (n2c2) shared task on adverse drug events and 
medication extraction.
METHODS: The proposed system (DrugEx) consists of a named entity recognizer 
(NER) to identify drugs and associated attributes and a relation extraction (RE) 
method to identify the relations between them. For NER, we explored deep 
learning-based approaches (ie, bidirectional long-short term memory with 
conditional random fields [BiLSTM-CRFs]) with various embeddings (ie, word 
embedding, character embedding [CE], and semantic-feature embedding) to 
investigate how different embeddings influence the performance. A rule-based 
method was implemented for RE and compared with a context-aware long-short term 
memory (LSTM) model. The methods were trained and evaluated using the 2018 n2c2 
shared task data.
RESULTS: The experiments showed that the best model (BiLSTM-CRFs with pretrained 
word embeddings [PWE] and CE) achieved lenient micro F-scores of 0.921 for NER, 
0.927 for RE, and 0.855 for the end-to-end system. NER, which relies on the 
pretrained word and semantic embeddings, performed better on most individual 
entity types, but NER with PWE and CE had the highest classification efficiency 
among the proposed approaches. Extracting relations using the rule-based method 
achieved higher accuracy than the context-aware LSTM for most relations. 
Interestingly, the LSTM model performed notably better in the reason-drug 
relations, the most challenging relation type.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed end-to-end system achieved encouraging results and 
demonstrated the feasibility of using deep learning methods to extract 
medication information from free-text data.

©Ghada Alfattni, Maksim Belousov, Niels Peek, Goran Nenadic. Originally 
published in JMIR Medical Informatics (https://medinform.jmir.org), 05.05.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/24678
PMCID: PMC8135022
PMID: 33949962

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


76. Drug Discov Today. 2021 Nov;26(11):2593-2607. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2021.06.009. 
Epub 2021 Jun 30.

AI-based language models powering drug discovery and development.

Liu Z(1), Roberts RA(2), Lal-Nag M(3), Chen X(4), Huang R(5), Tong W(6).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. Electronic address: zhichao.liu@fda.hhs.gov.
(2)National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA; ApconiX, BioHub at Alderley Park, Alderley Edge SK10 
4TG, UK; University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(3)Office of Translational Sciences, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, US 
FDA, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.
(4)National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA.
(5)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(6)National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. Electronic address: weida.tong@fda.hhs.gov.

The discovery and development of new medicines is expensive, time-consuming, and 
often inefficient, with many failures along the way. Powered by artificial 
intelligence (AI), language models (LMs) have changed the landscape of natural 
language processing (NLP), offering possibilities to transform treatment 
development more effectively. Here, we summarize advances in AI-powered LMs and 
their potential to aid drug discovery and development. We highlight 
opportunities for AI-powered LMs in target identification, clinical design, 
regulatory decision-making, and pharmacovigilance. We specifically emphasize the 
potential role of AI-powered LMs for developing new treatments for Coronavirus 
2019 (COVID-19) strategies, including drug repurposing, which can be 
extrapolated to other infectious diseases that have the potential to cause 
pandemics. Finally, we set out the remaining challenges and propose possible 
solutions for improvement.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2021.06.009
PMCID: PMC8604259
PMID: 34216835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Life (Basel). 2022 Feb 21;12(2):319. doi: 10.3390/life12020319.

SmileGNN: Drug-Drug Interaction Prediction Based on the SMILES and Graph Neural 
Network.

Han X(1), Xie R(2), Li X(1), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology 
(Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China.
(2)School of Medical Technology and Nursing, Shenzhen Polytechnic, Shenzhen 
518055, China.

Concurrent use of multiple drugs can lead to unexpected adverse drug reactions. 
The interaction between drugs can be confirmed by routine in vitro and clinical 
trials. However, it is difficult to test the drug-drug interactions widely and 
effectively before the drugs enter the market. Therefore, the prediction of 
drug-drug interactions has become one of the research priorities in the 
biomedical field. In recent years, researchers have been using deep learning to 
predict drug-drug interactions by exploiting drug structural features and graph 
theory, and have achieved a series of achievements. A drug-drug interaction 
prediction model SmileGNN is proposed in this paper, which can be characterized 
by aggregating the structural features of drugs constructed by SMILES data and 
the topological features of drugs in knowledge graphs obtained by graph neural 
networks. The experimental results show that the model proposed in this paper 
combines a variety of data sources and has a better prediction performance 
compared with existing prediction models of drug-drug interactions. Five out of 
the top ten predicted new drug-drug interactions are verified from the latest 
database, which proves the credibility of SmileGNN.

DOI: 10.3390/life12020319
PMCID: PMC8879716
PMID: 35207606

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.


78. Chem Res Toxicol. 2020 Jan 21;33(1):202-210. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00238. Epub 2019 Dec 13.

Prediction of Adverse Drug Reactions by Combining Biomedical Tripartite Network 
and Graph Representation Model.

Xue R(1), Liao J(1), Shao X(1), Han K(1), Long J(1), Shao L(2), Ai N(1), Fan 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences , 
Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310058 , China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine , Zhejiang 
University , 79 Qingchun Road , Hangzhou , 310003 , China.

As one of the primary contributors to high clinical attrition rates of drugs, 
toxicity evaluation is of critical significance to new drug discovery. 
Unsurprisingly, a vast number of computational methods have been developed at 
various stages of development pipeline to evaluate potential adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs). Despite previous success of these methods on individual ADR or 
certain drug family, there are great challenges to toxicity evaluation. In this 
study, a novel strategy was developed to predict the drug-ADR associations by 
combining deep learning and the biomedical tripartite network. This 
heterogeneous network contains biomedical linked data of three entities, for 
example, drugs, targets, and ADRs. For the first time, GraRep, a deep learning 
method for distributed representations, is introduced to learn graph 
representations and identify hidden features from the tripartite network which 
are further used for ADR prediction. Through this approach, drug-ADR 
associations could possibly be discovered from a systemic perspective. The 
accuracy of our method is 0.95 based on internal resource validation and 0.88 
based on external resource validation. Moreover, our results show the prediction 
accuracy using the tripartite network is better than the one with bipartite 
network, suggesting the model performance can be improved with further 
enrichment on information. According to the result of 10-fold cross validation, 
the deep learning model outperforms two traditional methods (topology-based 
measures and chemical structure-based measures). Additionally, predictive models 
are also constructed using other deep learning methods, and comparable results 
are achieved. In summary, the biomedical tripartite network-based deep learning 
model proposed here proves to offer a promising solution for prediction of ADRs.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00238
PMID: 31777246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Brief Bioinform. 2019 Jan 18;20(1):190-202. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx099.

Facilitating prediction of adverse drug reactions by using knowledge graphs and 
multi-label learning models.

Muñoz E(1)(2), Novácek V(2), Vandenbussche PY(1).

Author information:
(1)Fujitsu Ireland Ltd., Co. Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Insight Centre for Data Analytics, NUI Galway, Co. Galway, Ireland.

Timely identification of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) is highly important in 
the domains of public health and pharmacology. Early discovery of potential ADRs 
can limit their effect on patient lives and also make drug development pipelines 
more robust and efficient. Reliable in silico prediction of ADRs can be helpful 
in this context, and thus, it has been intensely studied. Recent works achieved 
promising results using machine learning. The presented work focuses on machine 
learning methods that use drug profiles for making predictions and use features 
from multiple data sources. We argue that despite promising results, existing 
works have limitations, especially regarding flexibility in experimenting with 
different data sets and/or predictive models. We suggest to address these 
limitations by generalization of the key principles used by the state of the 
art. Namely, we explore effects of: (1) using knowledge graphs-machine-readable 
interlinked representations of biomedical knowledge-as a convenient uniform 
representation of heterogeneous data; and (2) casting ADR prediction as a 
multi-label ranking problem. We present a specific way of using knowledge graphs 
to generate different feature sets and demonstrate favourable performance of 
selected off-the-shelf multi-label learning models in comparison with existing 
works. Our experiments suggest better suitability of certain multi-label 
learning methods for applications where ranking is preferred. The presented 
approach can be easily extended to other feature sources or machine learning 
methods, making it flexible for experiments tuned toward specific requirements 
of end users. Our work also provides a clearly defined and reproducible baseline 
for any future related experiments.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbx099
PMID: 28968655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Yearb Med Inform. 2019 Aug;28(1):165-173. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1677902. Epub 2019 
Apr 25.

Artificial Intelligence for Participatory Health: Applications, Impact, and 
Future Implications.

Denecke K(1), Gabarron E(2), Grainger R(3), Konstantinidis ST(4), Lau A(5), 
Rivera-Romero O(6), Miron-Shatz T(7), Merolli M(8).

Author information:
(1)Bern University of Applied Sciences, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Norwegian Centre for E-health Research, University Hospital of North Norway, 
Norway.
(3)University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand.
(4)University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(5)Centre for Health Informatics, Australian Institute of Health Innovation, 
Macquarie University, Australia.
(6)Universidad de Sevilla, Spain.
(7)Ono Academic College, Israel, and Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence 
Communication, Cambridge University, England.
(8)Swinburne University of Technology, and University of Melbourne, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Artificial intelligence (AI) provides people and professionals 
working in the field of participatory health informatics an opportunity to 
derive robust insights from a variety of online sources. The objective of this 
paper is to identify current state of the art and application areas of AI in the 
context of participatory health.
METHODS: A search was conducted across seven databases (PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, 
PsychInfo, ACM Digital Library, IEEExplore, and SCOPUS), covering articles 
published since 2013. Additionally, clinical trials involving AI in 
participatory health contexts registered at clinicaltrials.gov were collected 
and analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty-two articles and 12 trials were selected for review. The most 
common application of AI in participatory health was the secondary analysis of 
social media data: self-reported data including patient experiences with 
healthcare facilities, reports of adverse drug reactions, safety and efficacy 
concerns about over-the-counter medications, and other perspectives on 
medications. Other application areas included determining which online forum 
threads required moderator assistance, identifying users who were likely to drop 
out from a forum, extracting terms used in an online forum to learn its 
vocabulary, highlighting contextual information that is missing from online 
questions and answers, and paraphrasing technical medical terms for consumers.
CONCLUSIONS: While AI for supporting participatory health is still in its 
infancy, there are a number of important research priorities that should be 
considered for the advancement of the field. Further research evaluating the 
impact of AI in participatory health informatics on the psychosocial wellbeing 
of individuals would help in facilitating the wider acceptance of AI into the 
healthcare ecosystem.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1677902
PMCID: PMC6697496
PMID: 31022749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


81. Elife. 2021 Nov 23;10:e70734. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70734.

Data mining methodology for response to hypertension symptomology-application to 
COVID-19-related pharmacovigilance.

Xu X(1)(2)(3), Kawakami J(1)(4)(5), Millagaha Gedara NI(1)(3)(6), Riviere 
JE(1)(7), Meyer E(1)(4), Wyckoff GJ(1)(4)(5), Jaberi-Douraki M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1DATA Consortium, www.1DATA.life, Olathe, United States.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Kansas State University, Kansas City, United 
States.
(3)Kansas State University Olathe, Olathe, United States.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, United States.
(5)Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological and Chemical 
Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, United States.
(6)Department of Business Economics, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(7)Kansas State University and North Carolina State University, Kansas city, 
United States.

BACKGROUND: Potential therapy and confounding factors including typical 
co-administered medications, patient's disease states, disease prevalence, 
patient demographics, medical histories, and reasons for prescribing a drug 
often are incomplete, conflicting, missing, or uncharacterized in spontaneous 
adverse drug event (ADE) reporting systems. These missing or incomplete features 
can affect and limit the application of quantitative methods in 
pharmacovigilance for meta-analyses of data during randomized clinical trials.
METHODS: Data from patients with hypertension were retrieved and integrated from 
the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System; 134 antihypertensive drugs out of 1131 
drugs were filtered and then evaluated using the empirical Bayes geometric mean 
(EBGM) of the posterior distribution to build ADE-drug profiles with an emphasis 
on the pulmonary ADEs. Afterward, the graphical least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator (GLASSO) captured drug associations based on pulmonary ADEs 
by correcting hidden factors and confounder misclassification. Selected drugs 
were then compared using the Friedman test in drug classes and clusters obtained 
from GLASSO.
RESULTS: Following multiple filtering stages to exclude insignificant and 
noise-driven reports, we found that drugs from antihypertensives agents, 
urologicals, and antithrombotic agents (macitentan, bosentan, epoprostenol, 
selexipag, sildenafil, tadalafil, and beraprost) form a similar class with a 
significantly higher incidence of pulmonary ADEs. Macitentan and bosentan were 
associated with 64% and 56% of pulmonary ADEs, respectively. Because these two 
medications are prescribed in diseases affecting pulmonary function and may be 
likely to emerge among the highest reported pulmonary ADEs, in fact, they serve 
to validate the methods utilized here. Conversely, doxazosin and rilmenidine 
were found to have the least pulmonary ADEs in selected drugs from hypertension 
patients. Nifedipine and candesartan were also found by signal detection methods 
to form a drug cluster, shown by several studies an effective combination of 
these drugs on lowering blood pressure and appeared an improved side effect 
profile in comparison with single-agent monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: We consider pulmonary ADE profiles in multiple long-standing groups 
of therapeutics including antihypertensive agents, antithrombotic agents, 
beta-blocking agents, calcium channel blockers, or agents acting on the 
renin-angiotensin system, in patients with hypertension associated with high 
risk for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We found that several individual 
drugs have significant differences between their drug classes and compared to 
other drug classes. For instance, macitentan and bosentan from endothelin 
receptor antagonists show major concern while doxazosin and rilmenidine 
exhibited the least pulmonary ADEs compared to the outcomes of other drugs. 
Using techniques in this study, we assessed and confirmed the hypothesis that 
drugs from the same drug class could have very different pulmonary ADE profiles 
affecting outcomes in acute respiratory illness.
FUNDING: GJW and MJD accepted funding from BioNexus KC for funding on this 
project, but BioNexus KC had no direct role in this article.

© 2021, Xu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70734
PMCID: PMC8754433
PMID: 34812146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: XX, JK, NM, JR, EM, GW, MJ No competing 
interests declared


82. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Nov 5;22(6):bbab133. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab133.

SSI-DDI: substructure-substructure interactions for drug-drug interaction 
prediction.

Nyamabo AK(1), Yu H(1), Shi JY(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 
710072, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, 
China.

A major concern with co-administration of different drugs is the high risk of 
interference between their mechanisms of action, known as adverse drug-drug 
interactions (DDIs), which can cause serious injuries to the organism. Although 
several computational methods have been proposed for identifying potential 
adverse DDIs, there is still room for improvement. Existing methods are not 
explicitly based on the knowledge that DDIs are fundamentally caused by chemical 
substructure interactions instead of whole drugs' chemical structures. 
Furthermore, most of existing methods rely on manually engineered molecular 
representation, which is limited by the domain expert's knowledge.We propose 
substructure-substructure interaction-drug-drug interaction (SSI-DDI), a deep 
learning framework, which operates directly on the raw molecular graph 
representations of drugs for richer feature extraction; and, most importantly, 
breaks the DDI prediction task between two drugs down to identifying pairwise 
interactions between their respective substructures. SSI-DDI is evaluated on 
real-world data and improves DDI prediction performance compared to 
state-of-the-art methods. Source code is freely available at 
https://github.com/kanz76/SSI-DDI.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab133
PMID: 33951725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Drug Saf. 2019 Jan;42(1):135-146. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-0764-x.

Adverse Drug Events Detection in Clinical Notes by Jointly Modeling Entities and 
Relations Using Neural Networks.

Dandala B(1), Joopudi V(1), Devarakonda M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA.
(2)IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. mvd@acm.org.
(3)Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Tempe, USA. mvd@acm.org.

BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE: Adverse drug events (ADEs) occur in approximately 
2-5% of hospitalized patients, often resulting in poor outcomes or even death. 
Extraction of ADEs from clinical narratives can accelerate and automate 
pharmacovigilance. Using state-of-the-art deep-learning neural networks to 
jointly model concept and relation extraction, we achieved the highest 
integrated task score in the 2018 Medication and Adverse Drug Event (MADE) 1.0 
challenge.
METHODS: We used a combined bidirectional long short-term memory (BiLSTM) and 
conditional random fields (CRF) neural network to detect medical entities 
relevant to ADEs and a combined BiLSTM and attention network to determine 
relations, including the adverse drug reaction relation between medication and 
sign or symptom entities. Using these models, we conducted three experiments: 
(1) separate and sequential modeling of entities and relations; (2) joint 
modeling where relations between medications and sign or symptoms determined ADE 
and indication entities; (3) use of information from external resources such as 
the US FDA's adverse event database as additional input to the second method.
RESULTS: Joint modeling improved the overall task accuracy from 0.62 to 0.65 F 
measure, and the additional use of external resources improved the accuracy to 
0.66 F measure. Given the gold-standard medical entity labels, the joint model 
plus external resources method achieved F measures of 0.83 for ADE-relevant 
medical entity detection and 0.87 for relation detection.
CONCLUSION: It is important to use joint modeling techniques and external 
resources for effectively detecting ADEs from clinical narratives in electronic 
health record (EHR) systems. While the extraction of entities and relations 
individually achieved high accuracy, the integrated task still has room for 
further improvement.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-0764-x
PMID: 30649738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Med Toxicol. 2022 Oct;18(4):311-320. doi: 10.1007/s13181-022-00906-2. Epub 
2022 Sep 12.

Artificial Intelligent Context-Aware Machine-Learning Tool to Detect Adverse 
Drug Events from Social Media Platforms.

Roosan D(1), Law AV(2), Roosan MR(3), Li Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administration, Western University of 
Health Sciences, 309 E 2nd St, Pomona, CA, 91766, USA. droosan@westernu.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Administration, Western University of 
Health Sciences, 309 E 2nd St, Pomona, CA, 91766, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Chapman University, 9401 Geronimo Rd, 
Irvine, CA, 92618, USA.
(4)Center for Information Systems and Technology, Claremont Graduate University, 
150 E 19th St, Claremont, CA, 91711, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Pharmacovigilance (PV) has proven to detect post-marketing adverse 
drug events (ADE). Previous research used the natural language processing (NLP) 
tool to extract unstructured texts relevant to ADEs. However, texts without 
context reduce the efficiency of such algorithms. Our objective was to develop 
and validate an innovative NLP tool, aTarantula, using a context-aware 
machine-learning algorithm to detect existing ADEs from social media using an 
aggregated lexicon.
METHOD: aTarantula utilized FastText embeddings and an aggregated lexicon to 
extract contextual data from three patient forums (i.e., MedHelp, MedsChat, and 
PatientInfo) taking warfarin. The lexicon used warfarin package inserts and 
synonyms of warfarin ADEs from UMLS and FAERS databases. Data was stored on 
SQLite and then refined and manually checked by three clinical pharmacists for 
validation.
RESULTS: Multiple organ systems where the most frequent ADE were reported at 
1.50%, followed by CNS side effects at 1.19%. Lymphatic system ADEs were the 
least common side effect reported at 0.09%. The overall Spearman rank 
correlation coefficient between patient-reported data from the forums and FAERS 
was 0.19. As determined by pharmacist validation, aTarantula had a sensitivity 
of 84.2% and a specificity of 98%. Three clinical pharmacists manually validated 
our results. Finally, we created an aggregated lexicon for mining ADEs from 
social media.
CONCLUSION: We successfully developed aTarantula, a machine-learning algorithmn 
based on artificial intelligence to extract warfarin-related ADEs from online 
social discussion forums automatically. Our study shows that it is feasible to 
use aTarantula to detect ADEs. Future researchers can validate aTarantula on the 
diverse dataset.

© 2022. American College of Medical Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1007/s13181-022-00906-2
PMCID: PMC9492823
PMID: 36097239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


85. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2020 Jan;24(1):57-68. doi: 
10.1109/JBHI.2019.2932740. Epub 2019 Aug 2.

Semi-Supervised Learning Algorithm for Identifying High-Priority Drug-Drug 
Interactions Through Adverse Event Reports.

Liu N, Chen CB, Kumara S.

Identifying drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is a critical enabler for reducing 
adverse drug events and improving patient safety. Generating proper DDI alerts 
during prescribing workflow has the potential to prevent DDI-related adverse 
events. However, the implementation of DDI alerting system remains a challenge 
as users are experiencing alert overload which causes alert fatigue. One 
strategy to optimize the current system is to establish a list of high-priority 
DDIs for alerting purposes, though it is a resource-intensive task. In this 
study, we propose a machine learning framework to extract useful features from 
the FDA adverse event reports and then identify potential high-priority DDIs 
using an autoencoder-based semi-supervised learning algorithm. The experimental 
results demonstrate the effectiveness of using adverse event feature 
representations in differentiating high- and low-priority DDIs. Additionally, 
the proposed algorithm utilizes stacked autoencoders and weighted support vector 
machine for boosting classification performance, which outperforms other 
competing methods in terms of F-measure and AUC score. This framework integrates 
multiple information sources, leverages domain knowledge and clinical evidence, 
and provides a practical approach for pre-screening high-priority DDI candidates 
for medication alerts.

DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2019.2932740
PMID: 31395567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Drug Saf. 2021 Feb;44(2):125-132. doi: 10.1007/s40264-020-01001-7. Epub 2020 Oct 
7.

Artificial Intelligence, Real-World Automation and the Safety of Medicines.

Bate A(1)(2), Hobbiger SF(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Safety and Pharmacovigilance, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, 
Middlesex, TW8 9GS, UK. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(2)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, Keppel St, London, WC1E 7HT, UK. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(3)Clinical Safety and Pharmacovigilance, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, 
Middlesex, TW8 9GS, UK.

Despite huge technological advances in the capabilities to capture, store, link 
and analyse data electronically, there has been some but limited impact on 
routine pharmacovigilance. We discuss emerging research in the use of artificial 
intelligence, machine learning and automation across the pharmacovigilance 
lifecycle including pre-licensure. Reasons are provided on why adoption is 
challenging and we also provide a perspective on changes needed to accelerate 
adoption, and thereby improve patient safety. Last, we make clear that while 
technologies could be superimposed on existing pharmacovigilance processes for 
incremental improvements, these great societal advances in data and technology 
also provide us with a timely opportunity to reconsider everything we do in 
pharmacovigilance operations to maximise the benefit of these advances.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-020-01001-7
PMID: 33026641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 7;18(8):3862. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18083862.

Understanding Patient Needs Regarding Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting Smartphone 
Applications: A Qualitative Insight from Saudi Arabia.

Kassem LM(1), Alhabib B(1), Alzunaydi K(1), Farooqui M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Unaizah College of Pharmacy, Qassim 
University, Unaizah 51911, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: A pragmatic shift in the healthcare sector characterized by moving 
from curative to preventive approaches highlights the role of pharmacovigilance 
in patient safety. There have been few published studies on patient reporting of 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in Saudi Arabia. This qualitative study aims to 
explore the community opinions and the need for patient-friendly smartphone 
applications (SPAs) to enhance their participation in ADR reporting.
METHODS: Purposeful sampling was followed to recruit study participants, a 
semi-structured interview guide was used to conduct interviews, and the 
saturation was reached after the 13th interviewer; no new information was 
obtained after two subsequent interviews. All the interviews were 
audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed by means of a standard 
content analysis framework.
RESULTS: As per the WHO guidelines, eleven participants were aware of the term 
"ADR". All the participants denied receiving any prior education and attending 
events about ADRs and were unaware of the Saudi FDA-ADR reporting systems. The 
use of technologies such as SPAs has been widely accepted with a high level of 
concern for data confidentiality and privacy.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings point out the need to build patient-oriented 
educational programs to increase their awareness of ADR reporting and to 
prioritize the use of artificial intelligence (AI) to be integrated in the Saudi 
healthcare system to develop future SPAs for improving both patient safety and 
signal detection of ADRs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18083862
PMCID: PMC8067764
PMID: 33917014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


88. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):459-476. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01155-6. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Machine Learning in Causal Inference: Application in Pharmacovigilance.

Zhao Y(1), Yu Y(2), Wang H(1), Li Y(1), Deng Y(1), Jiang G(2), Luo Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, Room 11-189, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(2)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, 55902, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, Room 11-189, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. 
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu.

Erratum in
    Drug Saf. 2022 Aug;45(8):927.

Monitoring adverse drug events or pharmacovigilance has been promoted by the 
World Health Organization to assure the safety of medicines through a timely and 
reliable information exchange regarding drug safety issues. We aim to discuss 
the application of machine learning methods as well as causal inference 
paradigms in pharmacovigilance. We first reviewed data sources for 
pharmacovigilance. Then, we examined traditional causal inference paradigms, 
their applications in pharmacovigilance, and how machine learning methods and 
causal inference paradigms were integrated to enhance the performance of 
traditional causal inference paradigms. Finally, we summarized issues with 
currently mainstream correlation-based machine learning models and how the 
machine learning community has tried to address these issues by incorporating 
causal inference paradigms. Our literature search revealed that most existing 
data sources and tasks for pharmacovigilance were not designed for causal 
inference. Additionally, pharmacovigilance was lagging in adopting machine 
learning-causal inference integrated models. We highlight several currently 
trending directions or gaps to integrate causal inference with machine learning 
in pharmacovigilance research. Finally, our literature search revealed that 
the adoption of causal paradigms can mitigate known issues with machine learning 
models. We foresee that the pharmacovigilance domain can benefit from the 
progress in the machine learning field.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01155-6
PMCID: PMC9114053
PMID: 35579811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


89. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2022 Oct 4:1-4. doi: 10.1080/14740338.2022.2131770. Online 
ahead of print.

Changing paradigms in detecting rare adverse drug reactions: from 
disproportionality analysis, old and new, to machine learning.

Arku D(1), Yousef C(2), Abraham I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Health Outcomes and PharmacoEconomic Research, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)Pharmaceutical Care Department, Ministry of National Guard - Health Affairs, 
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Matrix45, Tucson, AZ, USA.

PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARYYour physician, pharmacist, nurse, or even you can 
voluntarily report suspected adverse events associated with drugs. The FDA 
Adverse Reporting System (FAERS) and the WHO Vigibase are large databases that 
store individual reports of adverse drug reactions (ADRs). While some ADRs are 
very common, others are seen rarely. Detecting rare and very rare ADRs is 
extremely difficult but very important for the safe use of drugs. Databases such 
as FAERS and WHO Vigibase contain a large amount of data and are commonly used 
for analysis applying a statistical method called disproportionately analysis. 
This type of analysis determines whether there is a higher-than-expected number 
of adverse reactions for a particular drug. In the future, machine learning will 
complement this process by applying algorithms to the data, constructing and 
refining rules of inference, and building predictive models of ADRs. This 
paradigm change in testing for ADRs is expected to provide a better 
understanding of the factors impacting drug safety.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2022.2131770
PMID: 36181369


90. Pharmacogenomics. 2018 Apr;19(5):495-511. doi: 10.2217/pgs-2017-0182. Epub 2018 
Mar 8.

SNPs affecting the clinical outcomes of regularly used immunosuppressants.

Meng HY(1), Luo ZH(1), Hu B(1), Jin WL(1), Yan CK(1), Li ZB(1), Xue YY(1), Liu 
Y(1), Luo YE(1), Xu LQ(1), Yang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, PR China.

Recent studies have suggested that genomic diversity may play a key role in 
different clinical outcomes, and the importance of SNPs is becoming increasingly 
clear. In this article, we summarize the bioactivity of SNPs that may affect the 
sensitivity to or possibility of drug reactions that occur among the signaling 
pathways of regularly used immunosuppressants, such as glucocorticoids, 
azathioprine, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide and 
methotrexate. The development of bioinformatics, including machine learning 
models, has enabled prediction of the proper immunosuppressant dosage with 
minimal adverse drug reactions for patients after organ transplantation or for 
those with autoimmune diseases. This article provides a theoretical basis for 
the personalized use of immunosuppressants in the future.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs-2017-0182
PMID: 29517418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Drug Saf. 2019 Jun;42(6):743-750. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-00792-0.

A Comparison Study of Algorithms to Detect Drug-Adverse Event Associations: 
Frequentist, Bayesian, and Machine-Learning Approaches.

Pham M(1), Cheng F(2), Ramachandran K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of South Florida, 4202 
East Fowler Ave, CMC342, Tampa, FL, 33620, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd, MDC 30, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA. 
fcheng1@health.usf.edu.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of South Florida, 4202 
East Fowler Ave, CMC342, Tampa, FL, 33620, USA. ram@usf.edu.

INTRODUCTION: It is important to monitor the safety profile of drugs, and mining 
for strong associations between drugs and adverse events is an effective and 
inexpensive method of post-marketing safety surveillance.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of our work was to compare the accuracy of both common 
and innovative methods of data mining for pharmacovigilance purposes.
METHODS: We used the reference standard provided by the Observational Medical 
Outcomes Partnership, which contains 398 drug-adverse event pairs (165 positive 
controls, 233 negative controls). Ten methods and algorithms were applied to the 
US FDA Adverse Event Reporting System data to investigate the 398 pairs. The ten 
methods include popular methods in the pharmacovigilance literature, newly 
developed pharmacovigilance methods as at 2018, and popular methods in the 
genome-wide association study literature. We compared their performance using 
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot, area under the curve (AUC), 
and Youden's index.
RESULTS: The Bayesian confidence propagation neural network had the highest AUC 
overall. Monte Carlo expectation maximization, a method developed in 2018, had 
the second highest AUC and the highest Youden's index, and performed very well 
in terms of high specificity. The regression-adjusted gamma Poisson shrinkage 
model performed best under high-sensitivity requirements.
CONCLUSION: Our results will be useful to help choose a method for a given 
desired level of specificity. Methods popular in the genome-wide association 
study literature did not perform well because of the sparsity of data and will 
need modification before their properties can be used in the drug-adverse event 
association problem.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-00792-0
PMID: 30762164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Molecules. 2021 Feb 10;26(4):930. doi: 10.3390/molecules26040930.

Fast Identification of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) of Digestive and Nervous 
Systems of Organic Drugs by In Silico Models.

Chen M(1)(2)(3), Yang Z(1)(2)(3), Gao Y(4), Li C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China.
(2)Fujian Key Laboratory of TCM Health Status Identification, Fujian University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China.
(3)Fujian Engineering Center of Intelligent Diagnosis and Treatment of TCM Four 
Diagnosis, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, 
China.
(4)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 
361005, China.

This study aimed to discover concurrences of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and 
derive models of the most frequent items of ADRs based on the SIDER database, 
which included 1430 marketed drugs and 5868 ADRs. First, common ADRs of organic 
drugs were manually reclassified according to side effects in the human system 
and followed by an association rule analysis, which found ADRs of digestive and 
nervous systems often occurred at the same time with a good association rule. 
Then, three algorithms, linear discriminant analysis (LDA), support vector 
machine (SVM) and deep learning, were used to derive models of ADRs of digestive 
and nervous systems based on 497 organic monomer drugs and to identify key 
structural features in defining these ADRs. The statistical results indicated 
that these kinds of QSAR models were good tools for screening ADRs of digestive 
and nervous systems, which gave the ROC AUC values of 81.5%, 98.9%, 91.5%, 
69.5%, 78.4% and 78.8%, respectively. Then, these models were applied to 
investigate ADRs of 1536 organic compounds with four phase and zero rule-of-five 
(RO5) violations from the ChEMBL database. Based on the consensus ADRs' 
predictions of models, 58.1% and 42.6% of compounds were predicted to cause 
these two ADRs, respectively, indicating the significance of initial assessment 
of ADRs in early drug discovery.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26040930
PMCID: PMC7916347
PMID: 33578679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


93. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Oct 4;22(1):477. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04398-9.

On the robustness of generalization of drug-drug interaction models.

Kpanou R(#)(1)(2), Osseni MA(#)(3), Tossou P(3)(4), Laviolette F(3), Corbeil 
J(5).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science and Software Engineering, Université Laval, 1065, av. de la 
Médecine, Quebec, CA, Canada. sewagnouin-rogia.kpanou.1@ulaval.ca.
(2)InVivo AI, Mila - 180 Corporate Lab L, 6650, 01 Rue Saint-Urbain, Montreal, 
CA, H2S 3G9, Canada. sewagnouin-rogia.kpanou.1@ulaval.ca.
(3)Computer Science and Software Engineering, Université Laval, 1065, av. de la 
Médecine, Quebec, CA, Canada.
(4)InVivo AI, Mila - 180 Corporate Lab L, 6650, 01 Rue Saint-Urbain, Montreal, 
CA, H2S 3G9, Canada.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Université Laval, 1065, av. de la Médecine, 
Quebec, CA, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Deep learning methods are a proven commodity in many fields and 
endeavors. One of these endeavors is predicting the presence of adverse 
drug-drug interactions (DDIs). The models generated can predict, with reasonable 
accuracy, the phenotypes arising from the drug interactions using their 
molecular structures. Nevertheless, this task requires improvement to be truly 
useful. Given the complexity of the predictive task, an extensive benchmarking 
on structure-based models for DDIs prediction was performed to evaluate their 
drawbacks and advantages.
RESULTS: We rigorously tested various structure-based models that predict drug 
interactions using different splitting strategies to simulate different 
real-world scenarios. In addition to the effects of different training and 
testing setups on the robustness and generalizability of the models, we then 
explore the contribution of traditional approaches such as multitask learning 
and data augmentation.
CONCLUSION: Structure-based models tend to generalize poorly to unseen drugs 
despite their ability to identify new DDIs among drugs seen during training 
accurately. Indeed, they efficiently propagate information between known drugs 
and could be valuable for discovering new DDIs in a database. However, these 
models will most probably fail when exposed to unknown drugs. While multitask 
learning does not help in our case to solve the problem, the use of data 
augmentation does at least mitigate it. Therefore, researchers must be cautious 
of the bias of the random evaluation scheme, especially if their goal is to 
discover new DDIs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-021-04398-9
PMCID: PMC8489092
PMID: 34607569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


94. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):3-12. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz166.

2018 n2c2 shared task on adverse drug events and medication extraction in 
electronic health records.

Henry S(1), Buchan K(2), Filannino M(1)(3), Stubbs A(4), Uzuner O(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department is Information Sciences and Technology, George Mason University, 
Fairfax, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Information Science, University at Albany - State University of 
New York, Albany, New York, USA.
(3)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department is Mathematics and Computer Science, Simmons University, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This article summarizes the preparation, organization, evaluation, 
and results of Track 2 of the 2018 National NLP Clinical Challenges shared task. 
Track 2 focused on extraction of adverse drug events (ADEs) from clinical 
records and evaluated 3 tasks: concept extraction, relation classification, and 
end-to-end systems. We perform an analysis of the results to identify the state 
of the art in these tasks, learn from it, and build on it.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For all tasks, teams were given raw text of narrative 
discharge summaries, and in all the tasks, participants proposed deep 
learning-based methods with hand-designed features. In the concept extraction 
task, participants used sequence labelling models (bidirectional long short-term 
memory being the most popular), whereas in the relation classification task, 
they also experimented with instance-based classifiers (namely support vector 
machines and rules). Ensemble methods were also popular.
RESULTS: A total of 28 teams participated in task 1, with 21 teams in tasks 2 
and 3. The best performing systems set a high performance bar with F1 scores of 
0.9418 for concept extraction, 0.9630 for relation classification, and 0.8905 
for end-to-end. However, the results were much lower for concepts and relations 
of Reasons and ADEs. These were often missed because local context is 
insufficient to identify them.
CONCLUSIONS: This challenge shows that clinical concept extraction and relation 
classification systems have a high performance for many concept types, but 
significant improvement is still required for ADEs and Reasons. Incorporating 
the larger context or outside knowledge will likely improve the performance of 
future systems.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz166
PMCID: PMC7489085
PMID: 31584655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2018;138(6):809-813. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.17-00213-1.

[Machine Learning-based Prediction of Seizure-inducing Action as an Adverse Drug 
Effect].

[Article in Japanese]

Gao M(1), Sato M(1), Ikegaya Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo.
(2)Center for Information and Neural Networks.

　During the preclinical research period of drug development, animal testing is 
widely used to help screen out a drug's dangerous side effects. However, it 
remains difficult to predict side effects within the central nervous system. 
Here, we introduce a machine learning-based in vitro system designed to detect 
seizure-inducing side effects before clinical trial. We recorded local field 
potentials from the CA1 alveus in acute mouse neocortico-hippocampal slices that 
were bath-perfused with each of 14 different drugs, and at 5 different 
concentrations of each drug. For each of these experimental conditions, we 
collected seizure-like neuronal activity and merged their waveforms as one 
graphic image, which was further converted into a feature vector using Caffe, an 
open framework for deep learning. In the space of the first two principal 
components, the support vector machine completely separated the vectors (i.e., 
doses of individual drugs) that induced seizure-like events, and identified 
diphenhydramine, enoxacin, strychnine and theophylline as "seizure-inducing" 
drugs, which have indeed been reported to induce seizures in clinical 
situations. Thus, this artificial intelligence-based classification may provide 
a new platform to pre-clinically detect seizure-inducing side effects of drugs.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.17-00213-1
PMID: 29863052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pharmaceut Med. 2022 Oct;36(5):307-317. doi: 10.1007/s40290-022-00434-y. Epub 
2022 Jul 24.

Utilizing Deep Learning for Detecting Adverse Drug Events in Structured and 
Unstructured Regulatory Drug Data Sets.

Knisely BM(1), Hatim Q(2), Vaughn-Cooke M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD, USA. bknisely@terpmail.umd.edu.
(2)The US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) collects and retains 
several data sets on post-market drugs and associated adverse events (AEs). The 
FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) contains millions of AE reports 
submitted by the public when a medication is suspected to have caused an AE. The 
FDA monitors these reports to identify drug safety issues that were undetected 
during the premarket evaluation of these products. These reports contain patient 
narratives that provide information regarding the AE that needs to be coded 
using standardized terminology to enable aggregation of reports for further 
review. Additionally, the FDA collects structured drug product labels (SPLs) 
that facilitate standardized distribution of information regarding marketed 
medical products. Manufacturers are currently not required to code labels with 
associated AEs.
OBJECTIVES: Approaches for automated classification of reports by preferred 
terminology could enhance regulatory efficiency. The goal of this work was to 
assess the suitability of manually annotated FDA FAERS and SPL data sets to be 
subjected to predictive modeling.
METHODS: A recurrent neural network (RNN) was proposed as a proof-of-concept 
model for automated extraction of preferred AE terminology. A separate RNN was 
fit and cross-validated on two regulatory data sets with varying properties. 
First, the researchers trained and cross-validated a model on 325 annotated 
FAERS patient narratives for a sample of AE terms. A model was then trained and 
validated on a data set of 100 SPLs.
RESULTS: Model cross-validation results for product labels demonstrated that the 
model performed at least as well as more conventional models for all but one of 
the terms selected based on F1-score. Model results for the FAERS data set were 
mixed.
CONCLUSIONS: This work successfully demonstrated a proof-of-concept machine 
learning approach to automatically detect AEs in several textual regulatory data 
sets to support post-market regulatory activities. Limited instances of each AE 
class likely prohibited models from generalizing data effectively. Additional 
data may permit more robust validation.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-022-00434-y
PMID: 35871475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Jan 23;14(2):266. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14020266.

Using Machine Learning for Pharmacovigilance: A Systematic Review.

Pilipiec P(1)(2), Liwicki M(1), Bota A(1).

Author information:
(1)Embedded Intelligent Systems Lab, Department of Computer Science Electrical 
and Space Engineering, Luleå University of Technology, 97187 Luleå, Sweden.
(2)School of Business and Economics, Maastricht University, Tongersestraat 53, 
6211 LM Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Pharmacovigilance is a science that involves the ongoing monitoring of adverse 
drug reactions to existing medicines. Traditional approaches in this field can 
be expensive and time-consuming. The application of natural language processing 
(NLP) to analyze user-generated content is hypothesized as an effective 
supplemental source of evidence. In this systematic review, a broad and 
multi-disciplinary literature search was conducted involving four databases. A 
total of 5318 publications were initially found. Studies were considered 
relevant if they reported on the application of NLP to understand user-generated 
text for pharmacovigilance. A total of 16 relevant publications were included in 
this systematic review. All studies were evaluated to have medium reliability 
and validity. For all types of drugs, 14 publications reported positive findings 
with respect to the identification of adverse drug reactions, providing 
consistent evidence that natural language processing can be used effectively and 
accurately on user-generated textual content that was published to the Internet 
to identify adverse drug reactions for the purpose of pharmacovigilance. The 
evidence presented in this review suggest that the analysis of textual data has 
the potential to complement the traditional system of pharmacovigilance.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14020266
PMCID: PMC8924891
PMID: 35213998

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


98. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 May 17;14(5):472. doi: 10.3390/ph14050472.

Descriptors of Cytochrome Inhibitors and Useful Machine Learning Based Methods 
for the Design of Safer Drugs.

Beck TC(1)(2), Beck KR(3), Morningstar J(2), Benjamin MM(1)(2), Norris RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery & Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
280 Calhoun Street, QF204, Charleston, SC 29424-2303, USA.
(2)Regenerative Medicine & Cell Biology, Medical University of South Carolina, 
171 Ashley Avenue, 604F CRI, Charleston, SC 29424-2303, USA.
(3)College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, 217 Lloyd M Parks Hall, 500 
West 12th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Roughly 2.8% of annual hospitalizations are a result of adverse drug 
interactions in the United States, representing more than 245,000 
hospitalizations. Drug-drug interactions commonly arise from major cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) inhibition. Various approaches are routinely employed in order to 
reduce the incidence of adverse interactions, such as altering drug dosing 
schemes and/or minimizing the number of drugs prescribed; however, often, a 
reduction in the number of medications cannot be achieved without impacting 
therapeutic outcomes. Nearly 80% of drugs fail in development due to 
pharmacokinetic issues, outlining the importance of examining cytochrome 
interactions during preclinical drug design. In this review, we examined the 
physiochemical and structural properties of small molecule inhibitors of CYPs 
3A4, 2D6, 2C19, 2C9, and 1A2. Although CYP inhibitors tend to have distinct 
physiochemical properties and structural features, these descriptors alone are 
insufficient to predict major cytochrome inhibition probability and affinity. 
Machine learning based in silico approaches may be employed as a more robust and 
accurate way of predicting CYP inhibition. These various approaches are 
highlighted in the review.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14050472
PMCID: PMC8156202
PMID: 34067565

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


99. J Med Toxicol. 2018 Sep;14(3):248-252. doi: 10.1007/s13181-018-0667-3. Epub 2018 
Jun 1.

Machine Learning to Predict, Detect, and Intervene Older Adults Vulnerable for 
Adverse Drug Events in the Emergency Department.

Ouchi K(1)(2)(3)(4), Lindvall C(5)(6), Chai PR(7)(8)(9), Boyer EW(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis 
St, Neville 200, Boston, MA, 02125, USA. kouchi@partners.org.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
kouchi@partners.org.
(3)Serious Illness Care Program, Ariadne Labs, Boston, MA, USA. 
kouchi@partners.org.
(4)Department of Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care, Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. kouchi@partners.org.
(5)Department of Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care, Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Division of Palliative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis 
St, Neville 200, Boston, MA, 02125, USA.
(8)Department of Emergency Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)The Fenway Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Adverse drug events (ADEs) are common and have serious consequences in older 
adults. ED visits are opportunities to identify and alter the course of such 
vulnerable patients. Current practice, however, is limited by inaccurate 
reporting of medication list, time-consuming medication reconciliation, and poor 
ADE assessment. This manuscript describes a novel approach to predict, detect, 
and intervene vulnerable older adults at risk of ADE using machine learning. 
Toxicologists' expertise in ADE is essential to creating the machine learning 
algorithm. Leveraging the existing electronic health records to better capture 
older adults at risk of ADE in the ED may improve their care.

DOI: 10.1007/s13181-018-0667-3
PMCID: PMC6097964
PMID: 29858745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no 
additional conflicts of interest.


100. Reprod Toxicol. 2020 Aug;95:148-158. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.05.004. Epub 
2020 May 16.

Machine learning on drug-specific data to predict small molecule teratogenicity.

Challa AP(1), Beam AL(2), Shen M(3), Peryea T(3), Lavieri RR(4), Lippmann ES(5), 
Aronoff DM(6).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville 37203, TN, United States; Department of 
Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02115, MA, United States; 
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville 20850, MD, United States; Department of Chemical and 
Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville 37212, TN, United 
States. Electronic address: anup.p.challa.1@vumc.org.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston 
02115, MA, United States; Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston 02115, MA, United States.
(3)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville 20850, MD, United States.
(4)Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville 37203, TN, United States.
(5)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville 37212, TN, United States.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville 37203, TN, United States; Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville 
37203, TN, United States; Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville 37203, TN, United States.

Pregnant women are an especially vulnerable population, given the sensitivity of 
a developing fetus to chemical exposures. However, prescribing behavior for the 
gravid patient is guided on limited human data and conflicting cases of adverse 
outcomes due to the exclusion of pregnant populations from randomized, 
controlled trials. These factors increase risk for adverse drug outcomes and 
reduce quality of care for pregnant populations. Herein, we propose the 
application of artificial intelligence to systematically predict the 
teratogenicity of a prescriptible small molecule from information inherent to 
the drug. Using unsupervised and supervised machine learning, our model probes 
all small molecules with known structure and teratogenicity data published in 
research-amenable formats to identify patterns among structural, 
meta-structural, and in vitro bioactivity data for each drug and its 
teratogenicity score. With this workflow, we discovered three chemical 
functionalities that predispose a drug towards increased teratogenicity and two 
moieties with potentially protective effects. Our models predict three 
clinically-relevant classes of teratogenicity with AUC = 0.8 and nearly double 
the predictive accuracy of a blind control for the same task, suggesting 
successful modeling. We also present extensive barriers to translational 
research that restrict data-driven studies in pregnancy and therapeutically 
"orphan" pregnant populations. Collectively, this work represents a 
first-in-kind platform for the application of computing to study and predict 
teratogenicity.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.05.004
PMCID: PMC7577422
PMID: 32428651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


101. EBioMedicine. 2020 Jul;57:102837. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102837. Epub 2020 
Jun 18.

Machine learning guided association of adverse drug reactions with in vitro 
target-based pharmacology.

Ietswaart R(1), Arat S(2), Chen AX(3), Farahmand S(4), Kim B(5), DuMouchel W(6), 
Armstrong D(7), Fekete A(7), Sutherland JJ(8), Urban L(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, United States. Electronic address: robert_ietswaart@hms.harvard.edu.
(2)The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT 06032, United States. Electronic 
address: seda8arat@gmail.com.
(3)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States; Department of 
Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, United States.
(4)Computational Sciences PhD program, University of Massachusetts Boston, 
Boston, MA 02125, United States.
(5)Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 
02115, United States.
(6)Oracle Health Sciences, Burlington, MA 01803, United States.
(7)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, United 
States.
(8)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, United 
States. Electronic address: jeffrey.sutherland@novartis.com.
(9)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, United 
States. Electronic address: laszlo.urban@novartis.com.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are one of the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality in health care. Understanding which drug targets are 
linked to ADRs can lead to the development of safer medicines.
METHODS: Here, we analyse in vitro secondary pharmacology of common (off) 
targets for 2134 marketed drugs. To associate these drugs with human ADRs, we 
utilized FDA Adverse Event Reports and developed random forest models that 
predict ADR occurrences from in vitro pharmacological profiles.
FINDINGS: By evaluating Gini importance scores of model features, we identify 
221 target-ADR associations, which co-occur in PubMed abstracts to a greater 
extent than expected by chance. Amongst these are established relations, such as 
the association of in vitro hERG binding with cardiac arrhythmias, which further 
validate our machine learning approach. Evidence on bile acid metabolism 
supports our identification of associations between the Bile Salt Export Pump 
and renal, thyroid, lipid metabolism, respiratory tract and central nervous 
system disorders. Unexpectedly, our model suggests PDE3 is associated with 40 
ADRs.
INTERPRETATION: These associations provide a comprehensive resource to support 
drug development and human biology studies.
FUNDING: This study was not supported by any formal funding bodies.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.102837
PMCID: PMC7379147
PMID: 32565027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.


102. J Cheminform. 2022 Mar 4;14(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s13321-022-00589-5.

DeSIDE-DDI: interpretable prediction of drug-drug interactions using 
drug-induced gene expressions.

Kim E(1), Nam H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute of 
Science and Technology (GIST), Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute of 
Science and Technology (GIST), Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea. 
hjnam@gist.ac.kr.

Adverse drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a major concern to polypharmacy due to 
its unexpected adverse side effects and must be identified at an early stage of 
drug discovery and development. Many computational methods have been proposed 
for this purpose, but most require specific types of information, or they have 
less concern in interpretation on underlying genes. We propose a deep 
learning-based framework for DDI prediction with drug-induced gene expression 
signatures so that the model can provide the expression level of 
interpretability for DDIs. The model engineers dynamic drug features using a 
gating mechanism that mimics the co-administration effects by imposing attention 
to genes. Also, each side-effect is projected into a latent space through 
translating embedding. As a result, the model achieved an AUC of 0.889 and an 
AUPR of 0.915 in unseen interaction prediction, which is competitively very 
accurate and outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, it can 
predict potential DDIs with new compounds not used in training. In conclusion, 
using drug-induced gene expression signatures followed by gating and translating 
embedding can increase DDI prediction accuracy while providing model 
interpretability. The source code is available on GitHub ( 
https://github.com/GIST-CSBL/DeSIDE-DDI ).

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-022-00589-5
PMCID: PMC8895921
PMID: 35246258

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests are declared.


103. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2021 Jan 25;2020:1041-1049. eCollection 2020.

Inferring ADR causality by predicting the Naranjo Score from Clinical Notes.

Rawat BPS(1), Jagannatha A(1), Liu F(2), Yu H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Information and Computer Science, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst.
(2)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA.
(3)College of Information and Computer Science, University of Massachusetts 
Lowell.

Clinical judgment studies are an integral part of drug safety surveillance and 
pharmacovigilance frameworks. They help quantify the causal relationship between 
medication and its adverse drug reactions (ADRs). To conduct such studies, 
physicians need to review patients' charts manually to answer Naranjo 
questionnaire1. In this paper, we propose a methodology to automatically infer 
causal relations from patients' discharge summaries by combining the 
capabilities of deep learning and statistical learning models. We use 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)2 to extract 
relevant paragraphs for each Naranjo question and then use a statistical 
learning model such as logistic regression to predict the Naranjo score and the 
causal relation between the medication and an ADR. Our methodology achieves a 
macro-averaged f1-score of 0.50 and weighted f1-score of 0.63.

©2020 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC8075501
PMID: 33936480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Jun;107(6):1373-1382. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1750. Epub 2020 
Feb 28.

Broad-Spectrum Profiling of Drug Safety via Learning Complex Network.

Liu K(1), Ding RF(1), Xu H(2), Qin YM(1), He QS(1), Du F(1), Zhang Y(1), Yao 
LX(3), You P(4), Xiang YP(2), Ji ZL(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, 
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science 
and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(4)Xiamen Xianyue Hospital, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(5)The Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Drug safety is a severe clinical pharmacology and toxicology problem that has 
caused immense medical and social burdens every year. Regretfully, a 
reproducible method to assess drug safety systematically and quantitatively is 
still missing. In this study, we developed an advanced machine learning model 
for de novo drug safety assessment by solving the multilayer drug-gene-adverse 
drug reaction (ADR) interaction network. For the first time, the drug safety was 
assessed in a broad landscape of 1,156 distinct ADRs. We also designed a 
parameter ToxicityScore to quantify the overall drug safety. Moreover, we 
determined association strength for every 3,807,631 gene-ADR interactions, which 
clues mechanistic exploration of ADRs. For convenience, we deployed the model as 
a web service ADRAlert-gene at http://www.bio-add.org/ADRAlert/. In summary, 
this study offers insights into prioritizing safe drug therapy. It helps reduce 
the attrition rate of new drug discovery by providing a reliable ADR profile in 
the early preclinical stage.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1750
PMCID: PMC7325315
PMID: 31868917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.


105. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2021 Jan 25;2020:442-451. eCollection 2020.

Leveraging digital media data for pharmacovigilance.

Farooq H(1)(2), Niaz JS(1)(2), Fakhar S(1)(2), Naveed H(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Research Lab, Department of Computer Science National 
University of Computer and Emerging Sciences.
(2)Email: hammad.naveed@nu.edu.pk.

The development of novel drugs in response to changing clinical requirements is 
a complex and costly method with uncertain outcomes. Postmarket 
pharmacovigilance is essential as drugs often have under-reported side effects. 
This study intends to use the power of digital media to discover the 
under-reported side effects of marketed drugs. We have collected tweets for 11 
different Drugs (Alprazolam, Adderall, Fluoxetine, Venlafaxine, Adalimumab, 
Lamotrigine, Quetiapine, Trazodone, Paroxetine, Metronidazole and Miconazole). 
We have compiled a vast adverse drug reactions (ADRs) lexicon that is used to 
filter health related data. We constructed machine learning models for 
automatically annotating the huge amount of publicly available Twitter data. Our 
results show that on average 43 known ADRs are shared between Twitter and FAERS 
datasets. Moreover, we were able to recover on average 7 known side effects from 
Twitter data that are not reported on FAERS. Our results on Twitter dataset show 
a high concordance with FAERS, Medeffect and Drugs.com. Moreover, we manually 
validated some of the under-reported side effect predicted by our model using 
literature search. Common known and under-reported side effects can be found at 
https://github.com/cbrl-nuces/Leveraging-digital-media-data-for-pharmacovigilance.

©2020 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC8075481
PMID: 33936417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Feb;199:105891. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2020.105891. Epub 2020 Dec 5.

Adverse Drug Reaction extraction: Tolerance to entity recognition errors and 
sub-domain variants.

Santiso S(1), Pérez A(2), Casillas A(3).

Author information:
(1)IXA research group, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) Manuel 
Lardizabal 1, 20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: sara.santiso@ehu.eus.
(2)IXA research group, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) Manuel 
Lardizabal 1, 20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: alicia.perez@ehu.eus.
(3)IXA research group, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) Manuel 
Lardizabal 1, 20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: 
arantza.casillas@ehu.eus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2020.105891
PMID: 33333368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None Declared


107. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021 Sep 18;28(10):2184-2192. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocab114.

DeepADEMiner: a deep learning pharmacovigilance pipeline for extraction and 
normalization of adverse drug event mentions on Twitter.

Magge A(1), Tutubalina E(2), Miftahutdinov Z(2), Alimova I(2), Dirkson A(3), 
Verberne S(3), Weissenbacher D(1), Gonzalez-Hernandez G(1).

Author information:
(1)DBEI, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia.
(3)LIACS, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Research on pharmacovigilance from social media data has focused on 
mining adverse drug events (ADEs) using annotated datasets, with publications 
generally focusing on 1 of 3 tasks: ADE classification, named entity recognition 
for identifying the span of ADE mentions, and ADE mention normalization to 
standardized terminologies. While the common goal of such systems is to detect 
ADE signals that can be used to inform public policy, it has been impeded 
largely by limited end-to-end solutions for large-scale analysis of social media 
reports for different drugs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We present a dataset for training and evaluation of ADE 
pipelines where the ADE distribution is closer to the average 'natural balance' 
with ADEs present in about 7% of the tweets. The deep learning architecture 
involves an ADE extraction pipeline with individual components for all 3 tasks.
RESULTS: The system presented achieved state-of-the-art performance on 
comparable datasets and scored a classification performance of F1 = 0.63, span 
extraction performance of F1 = 0.44 and an end-to-end entity resolution 
performance of F1 = 0.34 on the presented dataset.
DISCUSSION: The performance of the models continues to highlight multiple 
challenges when deploying pharmacovigilance systems that use social media data. 
We discuss the implications of such models in the downstream tasks of signal 
detection and suggest future enhancements.
CONCLUSION: Mining ADEs from Twitter posts using a pipeline architecture 
requires the different components to be trained and tuned based on input data 
imbalance in order to ensure optimal performance on the end-to-end resolution 
task.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocab114
PMCID: PMC8449608
PMID: 34270701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Drug Saf. 2019 Jan;42(1):123-133. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-0761-0.

MADEx: A System for Detecting Medications, Adverse Drug Events, and Their 
Relations from Clinical Notes.

Yang X(1), Bian J(1), Gong Y(2), Hogan WR(1), Wu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Outcomes and Biomedical Informatics, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research and Center for 
Pharmacogenomics, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Health Outcomes and Biomedical Informatics, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. yonghui.wu@ufl.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Early detection of adverse drug events (ADEs) from electronic 
health records is an important, challenging task to support pharmacovigilance 
and drug safety surveillance. A well-known challenge to use clinical text for 
detection of ADEs is that much of the detailed information is documented in a 
narrative manner. Clinical natural language processing (NLP) is the key 
technology to extract information from unstructured clinical text.
OBJECTIVE: We present a machine learning-based clinical NLP system-MADEx-for 
detecting medications, ADEs, and their relations from clinical notes.
METHODS: We developed a recurrent neural network (RNN) model using a long 
short-term memory (LSTM) strategy for clinical name entity recognition (NER) and 
compared it with baseline conditional random fields (CRFs). We also developed a 
modified training strategy for the RNN, which outperformed the widely used early 
stop strategy. For relation extraction, we compared support vector machines 
(SVMs) and random forests on single-sentence relations and cross-sentence 
relations. In addition, we developed an integrated pipeline to extract entities 
and relations together by combining RNNs and SVMs.
RESULTS: MADEx achieved the top-three best performances (F1 score of 0.8233) for 
clinical NER in the 2018 Medication and Adverse Drug Events (MADE1.0) challenge. 
The post-challenge evaluation showed that the relation extraction module and 
integrated pipeline (identify entity and relation together) of MADEx are 
comparable with the best systems developed in this challenge.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the efficiency of deep learning methods for 
automatic extraction of medications, ADEs, and their relations from clinical 
text to support pharmacovigilance and drug safety surveillance.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-0761-0
PMCID: PMC6402874
PMID: 30600484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Xi Yang, Jiang Bian, Yan 
Gong, William R. Hogan, Yonghui Wu have no conflicts of interest that are 
directly relevant to the content of this study.


109. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2011 Oct;7(10):1211-31. doi: 
10.1517/17425255.2011.611501. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Computational modeling of P450s for toxicity prediction.

Mishra NK(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Iceland, Center for Systems Biology, Sturlugata 8, 101 
Reykjavik, Iceland. nitishimtech@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Drug development is a time-consuming and cost-intensive process. 
On average, it takes around 12 - 15 years and approximately €800 billion to 
bring a new drug to the market. Despite introduction of combinatorial chemistry 
and establishment of high-throughput screening (HTS), the number of new drug 
entities is limited. In fact, a number of established drug entities have been 
withdrawn from the market because of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) and adverse 
drug reactions (ADRs).
AREAS COVERED: This review covers the advancements in cytochrome P450 (CYP450) 
modeling using different computational/machine learning (ML) tools over the past 
decade. A computational model for identifying non-toxic drug molecule from the 
pool of small chemical molecules is always welcome in the drug industry. Any 
computational tool that identifies the toxic molecule at early stage reduces the 
economic burden by slashing the number of molecules to be screened. This review 
covers all issues related to CYP-mediated toxicity such as specificity, 
inhibition, induction and regioselectivity.
EXPERT OPINION: Several computational methods for CYP-mediated toxicity are 
available, which are popular in computer-aided drug designing (CADD). These 
models may become helpful in toxicity prediction during early stages and can 
reduce high failure rates in preclinical and clinical trials. There is an urgent 
need to improve the accuracy, interpretability and confidence of the computation 
models used in drug discovery pathways.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.2011.611501
PMID: 21864218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):477-491. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01176-1. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Artificial Intelligence Based on Machine Learning in Pharmacovigilance: A 
Scoping Review.

Kompa B(1)(2), Hakim JB(3), Palepu A(3), Kompa KG(4), Smith M(5), Bain PA(6), 
Woloszynek S(7), Painter JL(8), Bate A(9)(10)(11), Beam AL(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)CAUSALab, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard-MIT, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(4)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)GlaxoSmithKline, Durham, NC, USA.
(9)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, UK.
(10)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology, London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of London, London, UK.
(11)Department of Medicine, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA. Andrew_Beam@hms.harvard.edu.
(13)CAUSALab, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. 
Andrew_Beam@hms.harvard.edu.
(14)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA. Andrew_Beam@hms.harvard.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Artificial intelligence based on machine learning has made large 
advancements in many fields of science and medicine but its impact on 
pharmacovigilance is yet unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The present study conducted a scoping review of the use of artificial 
intelligence based on machine learning to understand how it is used for 
pharmacovigilance tasks, characterize differences with other fields, and 
identify opportunities to improve pharmacovigilance through the use of machine 
learning.
DESIGN: The PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and IEEE Xplore databases were 
searched to identify articles pertaining to the use of machine learning in 
pharmacovigilance published from the year 2000 to September 2021. After manual 
screening of 7744 abstracts, a total of 393 papers met the inclusion criteria 
for further analysis. Extraction of key data on study design, data sources, 
sample size, and machine learning methodology was performed. Studies with the 
characteristics of good machine learning practice were defined and manual review 
focused on identifying studies that fulfilled these criteria and results that 
showed promise.
RESULTS: The majority of studies (53%) were focused on detecting safety signals 
using traditional statistical methods. Of the studies that used more recent 
machine learning methods, 61% used off-the-shelf techniques with minor 
modifications. Temporal analysis revealed that newer methods such as deep 
learning have shown increased use in recent years. We found only 42 studies 
(10%) that reflect current best practices and trends in machine learning. In the 
subset of 154 papers that focused on data intake and ingestion, 30 (19%) were 
found to incorporate the same best practices.
CONCLUSION: Advances from artificial intelligence have yet to fully penetrate 
pharmacovigilance, although recent studies show signs that this may be changing.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01176-1
PMID: 35579812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Aug;110(2):392-400. doi: 10.1002/cpt.2266. Epub 2021 
May 8.

Artificial Intelligence for Unstructured Healthcare Data: Application to Coding 
of Patient Reporting of Adverse Drug Reactions.

Létinier L(1)(2)(3), Jouganous J(3), Benkebil M(4), Bel-Létoile A(3), Goehrs 
C(3), Singier A(1), Rouby F(5)(6), Lacroix C(5)(6), Miremont G(1)(2), Micallef 
J(5)(6), Salvo F(1)(2), Pariente A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, BPH, U1219, Team Pharmacoepidemiology, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 
France.
(2)CHU de Bordeaux, Pole de Santé Publique, Service de Pharmacologie Médicale, 
Centre de Pharmacovigilance de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Synapse Medicine, Bordeaux, France.
(4)Surveillance Division, Agence nationale de sécurité du médicament et des 
produits de santé (ANSM), Saint Denis, France.
(5)CRPV Marseille Provence Corse, Service Hospitalo-Universitaire de 
Pharmacologie Clinique et Pharmacovigilance, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Marseille, Marseille, France.
(6)Institut des Neurosciences des Systèmes, INSERM 1106, Aix Marseille 
Université, Marseille, France.

Adverse drug reaction (ADR) reporting is a major component of drug safety 
monitoring; its input will, however, only be optimized if systems can manage to 
deal with its tremendous flow of information, based primarily on unstructured 
text fields. The aim of this study was to develop an automated system allowing 
to code ADRs from patient reports. Our system was based on a knowledge base 
about drugs, enriched by supervised machine learning (ML) models trained on 
patients reporting data. To train our models, we selected all cases of ADRs 
reported by patients to a French Pharmacovigilance Centre through a national 
web-portal between March 2017 and March 2019 (n = 2,058 reports). We tested both 
conventional ML models and deep-learning models. We performed an external 
validation using a dataset constituted of a random sample of ADRs reported to 
the Marseille Pharmacovigilance Centre over the same period (n = 187). Here, we 
show that regarding area under the curve (AUC) and F-measure, the best model to 
identify ADRs was gradient boosting trees (LGBM), with an AUC of 0.93 
(0.92-0.94) and F-measure of 0.72 (0.68-0.75). This model was run for external 
validation showing an AUC of 0.91 and a F-measure of 0.58. We evaluated an 
artificial intelligence pipeline that was found able to learn how to identify 
correctly ADRs from unstructured data. This result allowed us to start a new 
study using more data to further improve our performance and offer a tool that 
is useful in practice to efficiently manage drug safety information.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.2266
PMCID: PMC8359992
PMID: 33866552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.L., J.J., A.B., and C.G. were employed by 
Synapse Medicine at the time this research was conducted or hold stock/stock 
options therein. All other authors declared no competing interests.


112. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):56-64. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz141.

Extracting medications and associated adverse drug events using a natural 
language processing system combining knowledge base and deep learning.

Chen L(1), Gu Y(1), Ji X(1), Sun Z(1), Li H(1), Gao Y(1), Huang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Med Data Quest, Inc, La Jolla, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Detecting adverse drug events (ADEs) and medications related 
information in clinical notes is important for both hospital medical care and 
medical research. We describe our clinical natural language processing (NLP) 
system to automatically extract medical concepts and relations related to ADEs 
and medications from clinical narratives. This work was part of the 2018 
National NLP Clinical Challenges Shared Task and Workshop on Adverse Drug Events 
and Medication Extraction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors developed a hybrid clinical NLP system that 
employs a knowledge-based general clinical NLP system for medical concepts 
extraction, and a task-specific deep learning system for relations 
identification using attention-based bidirectional long short-term memory 
networks.
RESULTS: The systems were evaluated as part of the 2018 National NLP Clinical 
Challenges challenge, and our attention-based bidirectional long short-term 
memory networks based system obtained an F-measure of 0.9442 for relations 
identification task, ranking fifth at the challenge, and had <2% difference from 
the best system. Error analysis was also conducted targeting at figuring out the 
root causes and possible approaches for improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate the generic approaches and the practice of 
connecting general purposed clinical NLP system to task-specific requirements 
with deep learning methods. Our results indicate that a well-designed hybrid NLP 
system is capable of ADE and medication-related information extraction, which 
can be used in real-world applications to support ADE-related researches and 
medical decisions.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz141
PMCID: PMC7489056
PMID: 31591641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 21;264:388-392. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190249.

An Exploratory Study on Pseudo-Data Generation in Prescription and Adverse Drug 
Reaction Extraction.

Tao C(1), Lee K(2), Filannino M(2), Uzuner Ö(2).

Author information:
(1)The State University of New York at Albany, Albany, NY, USA.
(2)George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.

Prescription information and adverse drug reactions (ADR) are two components of 
detailed medication instructions that can benefit many aspects of clinical 
research. Automatic extraction of this information from free-text narratives via 
Information Extraction (IE) can open it up to downstream uses. IE is commonly 
tackled by supervised Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems which rely on 
annotated training data. However, training data generation is manual, 
time-consuming, and labor-intensive. It is desirable to develop automatic 
methods for augmenting manually labeled data. We propose pseudo-data generation 
as one such automatic method. Pseudo-data are synthetic data generated by 
combining elements of existing labeled data. We propose and evaluate two sets of 
pseudo-data generation methods: knowledge-driven methods based on gazetteers and 
data-driven methods based on deep learning. We use the resulting pseudo-data to 
improve medication and ADR extraction. Data-driven pseudo-data are suitable for 
concept categories with high semantic regularities and short textual spans. 
Knowledge-driven pseudo-data are effective for concept categories with longer 
textual spans, assuming the knowledge base offers good coverage of these 
concepts. Combining the knowledge- and data-driven pseudo-data achieves 
significant performance improvement on medication names and ADRs over baselines 
limited to the use of available labeled data.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190249
PMID: 31437951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2425:393-415. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_15.

Machine Learning Models for Predicting Liver Toxicity.

Liu J(1), Guo W(1), Sakkiah S(1), Ji Z(1), Yavas G(1), Zou W(1), Chen M(1), Tong 
W(1), Patterson TA(1), Hong H(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA.
(2)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA. Huixiao.hong@fda.hhs.gov.

Liver toxicity is a major adverse drug reaction that accounts for drug failure 
in clinical trials and withdrawal from the market. Therefore, predicting 
potential liver toxicity at an early stage in drug discovery is crucial to 
reduce costs and the potential for drug failure. However, current in vivo animal 
toxicity testing is very expensive and time consuming. As an alternative 
approach, various machine learning models have been developed to predict 
potential liver toxicity in humans. This chapter reviews current advances in the 
development and application of machine learning models for prediction of 
potential liver toxicity in humans and discusses possible improvements to liver 
toxicity prediction.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_15
PMID: 35188640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2021;141(2):179-185. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.20-00196-4.

[Potential for Big Data Analysis Using AI in the Field of Clinical Pharmacy].

[Article in Japanese]

Kiryu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)M&B Collaboration Medical Corporation Hokuetsu Hospital.

Industrial reforms utilizing artificial intelligence (AI) have advanced 
remarkably in recent years. The application of AI to big data analysis in the 
medical information field has also been advancing and is expected to be used to 
find drug adverse effects that cannot be predicted by conventional methods. We 
have developed an adverse drug reactions analysis system that uses machine 
learning and data from the Japanese Adverse Drug Event Report (JADER) database. 
The system was developed using the C# programming language and incorporates the 
open source machine learning library Accord.Net. Potential analytical 
capabilities of the system include discovering unknown drug adverse effects and 
evaluating drug-induced adverse events in pharmaceutical management. However, to 
apply the system to pharmaceutical management, it is important to examine the 
characteristics and suitability of the level of AI used in the system and to 
select statistical methods or machine learning when appropriate. If these points 
are addressed, there is potential for pharmaceutical management to be 
individualized and optimized in the clinical setting by using the developed 
system to analyze big data. The system also has the potential to allow 
individual healthcare facilities such as hospitals and pharmacies to contribute 
to drug repositioning, including the discovery of new efficacies, interactions, 
and drug adverse events.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.20-00196-4
PMID: 33518637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Nov;212:106415. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106415. Epub 2021 Sep 26.

Explainable artificial intelligence for pharmacovigilance: What features are 
important when predicting adverse outcomes?

Ward IR(1), Wang L(1), Lu J(1), Bennamoun M(2), Dwivedi G(3), Sanfilippo FM(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Population & Global Health, University of Western Australia, Perth; 
Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering, University of Western 
Australia, Perth.
(2)Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering, University of Western 
Australia, Perth.
(3)Cardiology Department Fiona Stanley Hospital, Harry Perkins Institute of 
Medical Research, Medical School University of Western Australia, Perth.
(4)School of Population & Global Health, University of Western Australia, Perth. 
Electronic address: frank.sanfilippo@uwa.edu.au.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has been 
identified as a viable method for determining the importance of features when 
making predictions using Machine Learning (ML) models. In this study, we created 
models that take an individual's health information (e.g. their drug history and 
comorbidities) as inputs, and predict the probability that the individual will 
have an Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) adverse outcome.
METHODS: Using XAI, we quantified the contribution that specific drugs had on 
these ACS predictions, thus creating an XAI-based technique for 
pharmacovigilance monitoring, using ACS as an example of the adverse outcome to 
detect. Individuals aged over 65 who were supplied Musculo-skeletal system 
(anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC) class M) or Cardiovascular system (ATC 
class C) drugs between 1993 and 2009 were identified, and their drug histories, 
comorbidities, and other key features were extracted from linked Western 
Australian datasets. Multiple ML models were trained to predict if these 
individuals would have an ACS related adverse outcome (i.e., death or 
hospitalisation with a discharge diagnosis of ACS), and a variety of ML and XAI 
techniques were used to calculate which features - specifically which drugs - 
led to these predictions.
RESULTS: The drug dispensing features for rofecoxib and celecoxib were found to 
have a greater than zero contribution to ACS related adverse outcome predictions 
(on average), and it was found that ACS related adverse outcomes can be 
predicted with 72% accuracy. Furthermore, the XAI libraries LIME and SHAP were 
found to successfully identify both important and unimportant features, with 
SHAP slightly outperforming LIME.
CONCLUSIONS: ML models trained on linked administrative health datasets in 
tandem with XAI algorithms can successfully quantify feature importance, and 
with further development, could potentially be used as pharmacovigilance 
monitoring techniques.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106415
PMID: 34715520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Girish Dwivedi 
reports personal fees from Pfizer, Amgen, Astra Zeneca and Artrya Pty Ltd, all 
of which are outside the submitted work. No other competing interests were 
declared.


117. Drug Saf. 2020 Jan;43(1):57-66. doi: 10.1007/s40264-019-00869-4.

Application of Augmented Intelligence for Pharmacovigilance Case Seriousness 
Determination.

Routray R(1), Tetarenko N(2), Abu-Assal C(3), Mockute R(2), Assuncao B(2), Chen 
H(3), Bao S(3), Danysz K(2), Desai S(2), Cicirello S(2), Willis V(3), Alford 
SH(3), Krishnamurthy V(3), Mingle E(2).

Author information:
(1)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA. routrayr@us.ibm.com.
(2)Celgene, Summit, NJ, USA.
(3)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Identification of adverse events and determination of their 
seriousness ensures timely detection of potential patient safety concerns. 
Adverse event seriousness is a key factor in defining reporting timelines and is 
often performed manually by pharmacovigilance experts. The dramatic increase in 
the volume of safety reports necessitates exploration of scalable solutions that 
also meet reporting timeline requirements.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop an augmented intelligence 
methodology for automatically identifying adverse event seriousness in 
spontaneous, solicited, and medical literature safety reports. Deep learning 
models were evaluated for accuracy and/or the F1 score against a ground truth 
labeled by pharmacovigilance experts.
METHODS: Using a stratified random sample of safety reports received by Celgene, 
we developed three neural networks for addressing identification of adverse 
event seriousness: (1) a binary adverse-event level seriousness classifier; (2) 
a classifier for determining seriousness categorization at the adverse-event 
level; and (3) an annotator for identifying seriousness criteria terms to 
provide supporting evidence at the document level.
RESULTS: The seriousness classifier achieved an accuracy of 83.0% in 
post-marketing reports, 92.9% in solicited reports, and 86.3% in medical 
literature reports. F1 scores for seriousness categorization were 77.7 for 
death, 78.9 for hospitalization, and 75.5 for important medical events. The 
seriousness annotator achieved an F1 score of 89.9 in solicited reports, and 
75.2 in medical literature reports.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that a neural network approach 
can provide an accurate and scalable solution for potentially augmenting 
pharmacovigilance practitioner determination of adverse event seriousness in 
spontaneous, solicited, and medical literature reports.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-019-00869-4
PMCID: PMC6965337
PMID: 31605285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ramani Routray, Claire Abu-Assal, Hanqing Chen, 
Shenghua Bao, Van Willis, Sharon Hensley Alford, and Vivek Krishnamurthy were 
employed by IBM Watson Health at the time this research was conducted. Niki 
Tatarenko, Ruta Mockute, Bruno Assuncao, Sameen Desai, Salvatore Cicirello, 
Karolina Danysz, and Edward Mingle were employed by Celgene Corporation at the 
time this research was conducted and hold stock/stock options therein.


118. Drug Discov Today. 2022 Mar;27(3):831-837. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2021.10.009. 
Epub 2021 Oct 27.

Drug-induced QT Prolongation Atlas (DIQTA) for enhancing cardiotoxicity 
management.

Li S(1), Xu Z(1), Guo M(1), Li M(1), Wen Z(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China.
(2)College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China; 
Medical Big Data Center, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China. 
Electronic address: w_zhining@scu.edu.cn.

Drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval is common in a variety of 
pharmaceutical treatments and can lead to serious clinical outcomes. Although 
substantial efforts have been made to prevent drug-induced QT interval 
prolongation, the lack of a centralized data source remains the main obstacle to 
further study of the underlying mechanism and the development of effective 
prediction strategies. To fill this gap, we propose a schema for stratifying the 
risk of marketed QT prolonging drugs based on US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved drug labeling and developed a Drug-Induced QT Prolongation Atlas 
(DIQTA). Potential application of DIQTA was shown by precision dosing in 
off-label use and therapeutic strategy optimization, as well as the facilitation 
of artificial intelligence (AI)-based modeling in predictive toxicity.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2021.10.009
PMID: 34718206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Apr 23;11:582470. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.582470. 
eCollection 2020.

Integrated Random Negative Sampling and Uncertainty Sampling in Active Learning 
Improve Clinical Drug Safety Drug-Drug Interaction Information Retrieval.

Xie W(1), Wang L(1)(2), Cheng Q(1), Wang X(1), Wang Y(1), Bi H(3), He B(1), Feng 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Intelligent System and Bioinformatics, College of Intelligent 
Systems Science and Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
College of Biomedical Information and Engineering, Hainan Medical University, 
Haikou, China.
(3)The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

Clinical drug-drug interactions (DDIs) have been a major cause for not only 
medical error but also adverse drug events (ADEs). The published literature on 
DDI clinical toxicity continues to grow significantly, and high-performance DDI 
information retrieval (IR) text mining methods are in high demand. The 
effectiveness of IR and its machine learning (ML) algorithm depends on the 
availability of a large amount of training and validation data that have been 
manually reviewed and annotated. In this study, we investigated how active 
learning (AL) might improve ML performance in clinical safety DDI IR analysis. 
We recognized that a direct application of AL would not address several primary 
challenges in DDI IR from the literature. For instance, the vast majority of 
abstracts in PubMed will be negative, existing positive and negative labeled 
samples do not represent the general sample distributions, and potentially 
biased samples may arise during uncertainty sampling in an AL algorithm. 
Therefore, we developed several novel sampling and ML schemes to improve AL 
performance in DDI IR analysis. In particular, random negative sampling was 
added as a part of AL since it has no expanse in the manual data label. We also 
used two ML algorithms in an AL process to differentiate random negative samples 
from manually labeled negative samples, and updated both the training and 
validation samples during the AL process to avoid or reduce biased sampling. Two 
supervised ML algorithms, support vector machine (SVM) and logistic regression 
(LR), were used to investigate the consistency of our proposed AL algorithm. 
Because the ultimate goal of clinical safety DDI IR is to retrieve all DDI 
toxicity-relevant abstracts, a recall rate of 0.99 was set in developing the AL 
methods. When we used our newly proposed AL method with SVM, the precision in 
differentiating the positive samples from manually labeled negative samples 
improved from 0.45 in the first round to 0.83 in the second round, and the 
precision in differentiating the positive samples from random negative samples 
improved from 0.70 to 0.82 in the first and second rounds, respectively. When 
our proposed AL method was used with LR, the improvements in precision followed 
a similar trend. However, the other AL algorithms tested did not show improved 
precision largely because of biased samples caused by the uncertainty sampling 
or differences between training and validation data sets.

Copyright © 2021 Xie, Wang, Cheng, Wang, Wang, Bi, He and Feng.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.582470
PMCID: PMC8130007
PMID: 34017245

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


120. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Dec;42(12):1051-1063. doi: 
10.1016/j.tips.2021.09.007. Epub 2021 Oct 9.

Safety of medicines and vaccines - building next generation capability.

Bate A(1), Stegmann JU(2).

Author information:
(1)GSK, London, UK; London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University 
of London, London, UK; New York University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic 
address: andrew.x.bate@gks.com.
(2)GSK, Wavre, Belgium.

The systematic safety surveillance of real-world use of medicinal products and 
related activities (pharmacovigilance) started in earnest as a scientific field 
only in the 1960s. While developments have occurred over the past 50 years, 
adding to its complexity and sophistication, the extent to which some of these 
advances have positively impacted the capability for ensuring patient safety is 
questionable. We review how the conduct of safety surveillance has changed, 
highlight recent scientific advances, and argue how they need to be harnessed to 
enhance pharmacovigilance in the future. Specifically, we describe five changes 
that we believe should and will need to happen globally in the coming years: (i) 
better, more diverse data used for safety; (ii) the switch from manual 
activities to automation; (iii) removal of limited value, extraneous 
transactional activities and replacement with sharpened focus on scientific 
efforts to improve patient safety; (iv) patient-involved and focussed safety; 
and (v) personalised safety.

Copyright © 2021 GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals S.A. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2021.09.007
PMID: 34635346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Both authors are 
employees of GSK and hold shares/stock options in the company.


121. Clin Transl Sci. 2021 Mar;14(2):756-763. doi: 10.1111/cts.12944. Epub 2021 Jan 
8.

In Silico Approach to Predict Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reactions Using the 
Japanese Adverse Drug Event Report Database.

Ambe K(1), Ohya K(1), Takada W(1), Suzuki M(1), Tohkin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Regulatory Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.

Severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs), such as Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome, 
are rare and occasionally fatal. However, it is difficult to detect SCARs at the 
drug development stage, necessitating a new approach for prediction. Therefore, 
in this study, using the chemical structure information of SCAR-causative drugs 
from the Japanese Adverse Drug Event Report (JADER) database, we tried to 
develop a predictive classification model of SCAR through deep learning. In the 
JADER database from 2004 to 2017, we defined 185 SCAR-positive drugs and 195 
SCAR-negative drugs using proportional reporting ratios as the signal detection 
method, and the total number of reports. These SCAR-positive and SCAR-negative 
drugs were randomly divided into the training dataset for model construction and 
the test dataset for evaluation. The model performance was evaluated in the 
independent test dataset inside the applicability domain (AD), which is the 
chemical space for reliable prediction results. Using the deep learning model 
with molecular descriptors as the drug structure information, the area under the 
curve was 0.76 for the 148 drugs of the test dataset inside the AD. The method 
developed in the present study allows for utilizing the JADER database for SCAR 
classification, with potential to improve screening efficiency in the 
development of new drugs. This method may also help to noninvasively identify 
the causative drug, and help assess the causality between drugs and SCARs in 
postmarketing surveillance.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.12944
PMCID: PMC7993315
PMID: 33417306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.


122. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 13;7(1):872. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00908-z.

Predicting neurological Adverse Drug Reactions based on biological, chemical and 
phenotypic properties of drugs using machine learning models.

Jamal S(1), Goyal S(1), Shanker A(1)(2), Grover A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Banasthali University, Tonk, 
Rajasthan, India.
(2)Bioinformatics Programme, Centre for Biological Sciences, Central University 
of South Bihar, BIT Campus, Patna, Bihar, India.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India. 
abhinavgr@gmail.com.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) have become one of the primary reasons for the 
failure of drugs and a leading cause of deaths. Owing to the severe effects of 
ADRs, there is an urgent need for the generation of effective models which can 
accurately predict ADRs during early stages of drug development based on 
integration of various features of drugs. In the current study, we have focused 
on neurological ADRs and have used various properties of drugs that include 
biological properties (targets, transporters and enzymes), chemical properties 
(substructure fingerprints), phenotypic properties (side effects (SE) and 
therapeutic indications) and a combinations of the two and three levels of 
features. We employed relief-based feature selection technique to identify 
relevant properties and used machine learning approach to generated learned 
model systems which would predict neurological ADRs prior to preclinical 
testing. Additionally, in order to explain the efficiency and applicability of 
the models, we tested them to predict the ADRs for already existing 
anti-Alzheimer drugs and uncharacterized drugs, respectively in side effect 
resource (SIDER) database. The generated models were highly accurate and our 
results showed that the models based on chemical (accuracy 93.20%), phenotypic 
(accuracy 92.41%) and combination of three properties (accuracy 94.18%) were 
highly accurate while the models based on biological properties (accuracy 
82.11%) were highly informative.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-00908-z
PMCID: PMC5429831
PMID: 28408735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


123. Clin Ther. 2018 Dec;40(12):1973-1980. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.10.012. Epub 
2018 Nov 10.

Why Are We Still Creating Individual Case Safety Reports?

Streefland MB(1).

Author information:
(1)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. Electronic address: 
mariette.boerstoel@outlook.com.

The history of drug safety monitoring, or pharmacovigilance, has been an 
interesting one. Despite many and ongoing changes, it has typically been 
characterized by a rather slow-moving and reactive progression. 
Pharmacovigilance has always lagged behind other fields and industries and has 
been slow to adapt to new approaches. The main aspect holding it back has been a 
focus on the administrative and adherence side of creating individual case 
safety reports (ICSRs) and distributing these reports to the various 
stakeholders per strict regulatory requirements. Now, in 2018, we are more 
behind the curve than ever, and the field seems to be at a breaking point, 
calling for urgent and drastic changes. The question at hand is whether in this 
era of an abundance of electronically available data and technological 
advancements, which allow the application of automation, this process still 
makes sense. Is there still a place for creating and redistributing ICSRs from 
marketed use in a current, state-of-the-art safety system? Artificial 
intelligence, deep machine learning, and related technologies are already in 
place in many other industries. Swift and rigorous change is necessary for the 
discipline of pharmacovigilance to keep up with what is happening in the world 
at large.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.10.012
PMID: 30420290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2021 May 26;21(1):171. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-021-01518-6.

Investigating ADR mechanisms with Explainable AI: a feasibility study with 
knowledge graph mining.

Bresso E(1)(2), Monnin P(1)(3), Bousquet C(4)(5), Calvier FE(4), Ndiaye NC(6), 
Petitpain N(7), Smaïl-Tabbone M(1), Coulet A(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, Nancy, France.
(2)Centre d'Investigations Cliniques Plurithématique 1433, Inserm 1116, CHRU de 
Nancy, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(3)Orange, Belfort, France.
(4)Service de santé publique et information médicale, CHU de Saint Etienne, 
Saint Etienne, France.
(5)Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Université Paris 13, LIMICS, Paris, France.
(6)Université de Lorraine, Inserm U1256 - NGERE, Nancy, France.
(7)Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance, CHRU of Nancy, Nancy, France.
(8)Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, Nancy, France. 
adrien.coulet@inria.fr.
(9)Inria Paris, Paris, France. adrien.coulet@inria.fr.
(10)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Université 
de Paris, Paris, France. adrien.coulet@inria.fr.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are statistically characterized within 
randomized clinical trials and postmarketing pharmacovigilance, but their 
molecular mechanism remains unknown in most cases. This is true even for hepatic 
or skin toxicities, which are classically monitored during drug design. Aside 
from clinical trials, many elements of knowledge about drug ingredients are 
available in open-access knowledge graphs, such as their properties, 
interactions, or involvements in pathways. In addition, drug classifications 
that label drugs as either causative or not for several ADRs, have been 
established.
METHODS: We propose in this paper to mine knowledge graphs for identifying 
biomolecular features that may enable automatically reproducing expert 
classifications that distinguish drugs causative or not for a given type of ADR. 
In an Explainable AI perspective, we explore simple classification techniques 
such as Decision Trees and Classification Rules because they provide 
human-readable models, which explain the classification itself, but may also 
provide elements of explanation for molecular mechanisms behind ADRs. In 
summary, (1) we mine a knowledge graph for features; (2) we train classifiers at 
distinguishing, on the basis of extracted features, drugs associated or not with 
two commonly monitored ADRs: drug-induced liver injuries (DILI) and severe 
cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR); (3) we isolate features that are both 
efficient in reproducing expert classifications and interpretable by experts 
(i.e., Gene Ontology terms, drug targets, or pathway names); and (4) we manually 
evaluate in a mini-study how they may be explanatory.
RESULTS: Extracted features reproduce with a good fidelity classifications of 
drugs causative or not for DILI and SCAR (Accuracy = 0.74 and 0.81, 
respectively). Experts fully agreed that 73% and 38% of the most discriminative 
features are possibly explanatory for DILI and SCAR, respectively; and partially 
agreed (2/3) for 90% and 77% of them.
CONCLUSION: Knowledge graphs provide sufficiently diverse features to enable 
simple and explainable models to distinguish between drugs that are causative or 
not for ADRs. In addition to explaining classifications, most discriminative 
features appear to be good candidates for investigating ADR mechanisms further.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-021-01518-6
PMCID: PMC8157660
PMID: 34039343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


125. Brief Funct Genomics. 2022 May 21;21(3):216-229. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elac004.

BioDKG-DDI: predicting drug-drug interactions based on drug knowledge graph 
fusing biochemical information.

Ren ZH, Yu CQ, Li LP, You ZH, Guan YJ, Wang XF, Pan J.

The way of co-administration of drugs is a sensible strategy for treating 
complex diseases efficiently. Because of existing massive unknown interactions 
among drugs, predicting potential adverse drug-drug interactions (DDIs) 
accurately is promotive to prevent unanticipated interactions, which may cause 
significant harm to patients. Currently, numerous computational studies are 
focusing on potential DDIs prediction on account of traditional experiments in 
wet lab being time-consuming, labor-consuming, costly and inaccurate. These 
approaches performed well; however, many approaches did not consider multi-scale 
features and have the limitation that they cannot predict interactions among 
novel drugs. In this paper, we proposed a model of BioDKG-DDI, which integrates 
multi-feature with biochemical information to predict potential DDIs through an 
attention machine with superior performance. Molecular structure features, 
representation of drug global association using drug knowledge graph (DKG) and 
drug functional similarity features are fused by attention machine and predicted 
through deep neural network. A novel negative selecting method is proposed to 
certify the robustness and stability of our method. Then, three datasets with 
different sizes are used to test BioDKG-DDI. Furthermore, the comparison 
experiments and case studies can demonstrate the reliability of our method. Upon 
our finding, BioDKG-DDI is a robust, yet simple method and can be used as a 
benefic supplement to the experimental process.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elac004
PMID: 35368060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Aug;135:104517. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104517. 
Epub 2021 Jun 8.

Feature engineering and machine learning for causality assessment in 
pharmacovigilance: Lessons learned from application to the FDA Adverse Event 
Reporting System.

Kreimeyer K(1), Dang O(2), Spiker J(1), Muñoz MA(2), Rosner G(1), Ball R(2), 
Botsis T(3).

Author information:
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: tbotsis1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Our objective was to support the automated classification of Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) reports for 
their usefulness in assessing the possibility of a causal relationship between a 
drug product and an adverse event.
METHOD: We used a data set of 326 redacted FAERS reports that was previously 
annotated using a modified version of the World Health Organization-Uppsala 
Monitoring Centre criteria for drug causality assessment by a group of SEs at 
the FDA and supported a similar study on the classification of reports using 
supervised machine learning and text engineering methods. We explored many 
potential features, including the incorporation of natural language processing 
on report text and information from external data sources, for supervised 
learning and developed models for predicting the classification status of 
reports. We then evaluated the models on a larger data set of previously unseen 
reports.
RESULTS: The best-performing models achieved recall and F1 scores on both data 
sets above 0.80 for the identification of assessable reports (i.e. those 
containing enough information to make an informed causality assessment) and 
above 0.75 for the identification of reports meeting at least a Possible 
causality threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: Causal inference from FAERS reports depends on many components with 
complex logical relationships that are yet to be made fully computable. Efforts 
focused on readily addressable tasks, such as quickly eliminating unassessable 
reports, fit naturally in SE's thought processes to provide real enhancements 
for FDA workflows.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104517
PMID: 34130003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 27;7(1):16416. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16674-x.

Knowledge graph prediction of unknown adverse drug reactions and validation in 
electronic health records.

Bean DM(1), Wu H(1), Iqbal E(1), Dzahini O(2)(3), Ibrahim ZM(1)(4), Broadbent 
M(2), Stewart R(2)(5), Dobson RJB(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, 
London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom.
(2)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Denmark Hill, London, SE5 
8AZ, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College, London, 5th Floor, 
Franklin-Wilkins Building, 150 Stamford Street, London, SE1 9NH, United Kingdom.
(4)Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, UCL Institute of Health 
Informatics, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.
(5)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 
16 De Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, Institute of Psychiatry 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, 
London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. richard.j.dobson@kcl.ac.uk.
(7)Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, UCL Institute of Health 
Informatics, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. 
richard.j.dobson@kcl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2018 Mar 6;8(1):4284.

Unknown adverse reactions to drugs available on the market present a significant 
health risk and limit accurate judgement of the cost/benefit trade-off for 
medications. Machine learning has the potential to predict unknown adverse 
reactions from current knowledge. We constructed a knowledge graph containing 
four types of node: drugs, protein targets, indications and adverse reactions. 
Using this graph, we developed a machine learning algorithm based on a simple 
enrichment test and first demonstrated this method performs extremely well at 
classifying known causes of adverse reactions (AUC 0.92). A cross validation 
scheme in which 10% of drug-adverse reaction edges were systematically deleted 
per fold showed that the method correctly predicts 68% of the deleted edges on 
average. Next, a subset of adverse reactions that could be reliably detected in 
anonymised electronic health records from South London and Maudsley NHS 
Foundation Trust were used to validate predictions from the model that are not 
currently known in public databases. High-confidence predictions were validated 
in electronic records significantly more frequently than random models, and 
outperformed standard methods (logistic regression, decision trees and support 
vector machines). This approach has the potential to improve patient safety by 
predicting adverse reactions that were not observed during randomised trials.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16674-x
PMCID: PMC5703951
PMID: 29180758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MB and RS have received recent research funding 
from Roche, Janssen, and GSK. The other authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


128. J Transl Med. 2019 May 22;17(1):171. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1918-z.

Computational models for the prediction of adverse cardiovascular drug 
reactions.

Jamal S(1), Ali W(1), Nagpal P(2), Grover S(3), Grover A(4).

Author information:
(1)JH-Institute of Molecular Medicine, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India.
(3)JH-Institute of Molecular Medicine, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India. 
sonamgbt@gmail.com.
(4)School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India. 
abhinavgr@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Predicting adverse drug reactions (ADRs) has become very important 
owing to the huge global health burden and failure of drugs. This indicates a 
need for prior prediction of probable ADRs in preclinical stages which can 
improve drug failures and reduce the time and cost of development thus providing 
efficient and safer therapeutic options for patients. Though several approaches 
have been put forward for in silico ADR prediction, there is still room for 
improvement.
METHODS: In the present work, we have used machine learning based approach for 
cardiovascular (CV) ADRs prediction by integrating different features of drugs, 
biological (drug transporters, targets and enzymes), chemical (substructure 
fingerprints) and phenotypic (therapeutic indications and other identified 
ADRs), and their two and three level combinations. To recognize quality and 
important features, we used minimum redundancy maximum relevance approach while 
synthetic minority over-sampling technique balancing method was used to 
introduce a balance in the training sets.
RESULTS: This is a rigorous and comprehensive study which involved the 
generation of a total of 504 computational models for 36 CV ADRs using two 
state-of-the-art machine-learning algorithms: random forest and sequential 
minimization optimization. All the models had an accuracy of around 90% and the 
biological and chemical features models were more informative as compared to the 
models generated using chemical features.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained demonstrated that the predictive models 
generated in the present study were highly accurate, and the phenotypic 
information of the drugs played the most important role in drug ADRs prediction. 
Furthermore, the results also showed that using the proposed method, different 
drugs properties can be combined to build computational predictive models which 
can effectively predict potential ADRs during early stages of drug development.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-019-1918-z
PMCID: PMC6530172
PMID: 31118067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


129. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Dec 31;19(Suppl 19):517. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-018-2520-8.

Predicting adverse drug reactions of combined medication from heterogeneous 
pharmacologic databases.

Zheng Y(1), Peng H(1), Zhang X(1), Zhao Z(1), Yin J(2), Li J(3).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Analytics Institute, Faculty of Engineering and Information 
Technology, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway Ultimo, Sydney, 2007, 
Australia.
(2)Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney, Darlington, 
Sydney, 2006, Australia.
(3)Advanced Analytics Institute, Faculty of Engineering and Information 
Technology, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway Ultimo, Sydney, 2007, 
Australia. Jinyan.Li@uts.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Early and accurate identification of potential adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs) for combined medication is vital for public health. Existing 
methods either rely on expensive wet-lab experiments or detecting existing 
associations from related records. Thus, they inevitably suffer under-reporting, 
delays in reporting, and inability to detect ADRs for new and rare drugs. The 
current application of machine learning methods is severely impeded by the lack 
of proper drug representation and credible negative samples. Therefore, a method 
to represent drugs properly and to select credible negative samples becomes 
vital in applying machine learning methods to this problem.
RESULTS: In this work, we propose a machine learning method to predict ADRs of 
combined medication from pharmacologic databases by building up highly-credible 
negative samples (HCNS-ADR). Specifically, we fuse heterogeneous information 
from different databases and represent each drug as a multi-dimensional vector 
according to its chemical substructures, target proteins, substituents, and 
related pathways first. Then, a drug-pair vector is obtained by appending the 
vector of one drug to the other. Next, we construct a drug-disease-gene network 
and devise a scoring method to measure the interaction probability of every drug 
pair via network analysis. Drug pairs with lower interaction probability are 
preferentially selected as negative samples. Following that, the validated 
positive samples and the selected credible negative samples are projected into a 
lower-dimensional space using the principal component analysis. Finally, a 
classifier is built for each ADR using its positive and negative samples with 
reduced dimensions. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on 
simulative prediction for 1276 ADRs and 1048 drugs, comparing using four machine 
learning algorithms and with two baseline approaches. Extensive experiments show 
that the proposed way to represent drugs characterizes drugs accurately. With 
highly-credible negative samples selected by HCNS-ADR, the four machine learning 
algorithms achieve significant performance improvements. HCNS-ADR is also shown 
to be able to predict both known and novel drug-drug-ADR associations, 
outperforming two other baseline approaches significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that integration of different drug 
properties to represent drugs are valuable for ADR prediction of combined 
medication and the selection of highly-credible negative samples can 
significantly improve the prediction performance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2520-8
PMCID: PMC6311930
PMID: 30598065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


130. Database (Oxford). 2022 Sep 2;2022:baac071. doi: 10.1093/database/baac071.

Challenges and opportunities for mining adverse drug reactions: perspectives 
from pharma, regulatory agencies, healthcare providers and consumers.

Gonzalez-Hernandez G(1), Krallinger M(2), Muñoz M(3), Rodriguez-Esteban R(4), 
Uzuner Ö(5), Hirschman L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biomedicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 700 N. 
San Vicente Blvd., West Hollywood, CA 90069, USA.
(2)Life Sciences-Text Mining, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Plaça Eusebi 
Güell, 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain.
(3)Division of Pharmacovigilance, Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, 
Center of Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA, 10903 New Hampshire Ave, Silver 
Spring, MD 20993, USA.
(4)Roche Innovation Center Basel, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Grenzacherstrasse 124, 
Basel 4070, Switzerland.
(5)Information Sciences and Technology, George Mason University, 4400 University 
Dr, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.
(6)MITRE Labs, The MITRE Corporation, 202 Burlington Rd., Bedford, MA 01730, 
USA.

Monitoring drug safety is a central concern throughout the drug life cycle. 
Information about toxicity and adverse events is generated at every stage of 
this life cycle, and stakeholders have a strong interest in applying text mining 
and artificial intelligence (AI) methods to manage the ever-increasing volume of 
this information. Recognizing the importance of these applications and the role 
of challenge evaluations to drive progress in text mining, the organizers of 
BioCreative VII (Critical Assessment of Information Extraction in Biology) 
convened a panel of experts to explore 'Challenges in Mining Drug Adverse 
Reactions'. This article is an outgrowth of the panel; each panelist has 
highlighted specific text mining application(s), based on their research and 
their experiences in organizing text mining challenge evaluations. While these 
highlighted applications only sample the complexity of this problem space, they 
reveal both opportunities and challenges for text mining to aid in the complex 
process of drug discovery, testing, marketing and post-market surveillance. 
Stakeholders are eager to embrace natural language processing and AI tools to 
help in this process, provided that these tools can be demonstrated to add value 
to stakeholder workflows. This creates an opportunity for the BioCreative 
community to work in partnership with regulatory agencies, pharma and the text 
mining community to identify next steps for future challenge evaluations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baac071
PMCID: PMC9436770
PMID: 36050787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. IEEE Int Conf Healthc Inform. 2017 Aug;2017:5-12. doi: 10.1109/ICHI.2017.15. 
Epub 2017 Sep 14.

Extracting Drug-Drug Interactions with Word and Character-Level Recurrent Neural 
Networks.

Kavuluru R(1)(2), Rios A(2), Tran T(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Dept. of Internal Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are known to be responsible for nearly a third of 
all adverse drug reactions. Hence several current efforts focus on extracting 
signal from EMRs to prioritize DDIs that need further exploration. To this end, 
being able to extract explicit mentions of DDIs in free text narratives is an 
important task. In this paper, we explore recurrent neural network (RNN) 
architectures to detect and classify DDIs from unstructured text using the 
DDIExtraction dataset from the SemEval 2013 (task 9) shared task. Our methods 
are in line with those used in other recent deep learning efforts for relation 
extraction including DDI extraction. However, to our knowledge, we are the first 
to investigate the potential of character-level RNNs (Char-RNNs) for DDI 
extraction (and relation extraction in general). Furthermore, we explore a 
simple but effective model bootstrapping method to (a). build model averaging 
ensembles, (b). derive confidence intervals around mean micro-F scores (MMF), 
and (c). assess the average behavior of our methods. Without any rule based 
filtering of negative examples, a popular heuristic used by most earlier 
efforts, we achieve an MMF of 69.13. By adding simple replicable heuristics to 
filter negative instances we are able to achieve an MMF of 70.38. Furthermore, 
our best ensembles produce micro F-scores of 70.81 (without filtering) and 72.13 
(with filtering), which are superior to metrics reported in published results. 
Although Char-RNNs turnout to be inferior to regular word based RNN models in 
overall comparisons, we find that ensembling models from both architectures 
results in nontrivial gains over simply using either alone, indicating that they 
complement each other.

DOI: 10.1109/ICHI.2017.15
PMCID: PMC5639883
PMID: 29034375


132. OMICS. 2019 Mar;23(3):134-137. doi: 10.1089/omi.2019.0020. Epub 2019 Mar 1.

Panvigilance: Integrating Biomarkers in Clinical Trials for Systems 
Pharmacovigilance.

Şardaş S(1), Kendirci A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, İstinye University, İstanbul, 
Turkey.

Drug safety and pharmacovigilance are rapidly changing with biomarkers and new 
technologies such as artificial intelligence. However, we need new ideas and 
application contexts for integration of biomarkers and emerging technologies in 
modern pharmacovigilance. A new concept, panvigilance, has been recently 
introduced for proactive "stress testing" of new drug candidates in panels of 
patients or healthy volunteers identified by biomarkers, and who are situated in 
population edges in terms of pharmacokinetic (PK) and/or molecular target 
interindividual variability. Panvigilance aims to provide upper and lower bound 
estimates for drug performance under conditions that mimic population edges. 
Subsequently, it becomes easier to extrapolate pharmacovigilance signals with 
regard to individuals who reside in between the population edges. In this expert 
review, we explain that the prefix "pan," meaning everything or all, refers to 
the three-pronged panvigilance goals to (1) decipher the full population scale 
variability in medicinal product PKs and molecular target variability, (2) 
empower forecasting of pharmacovigilance signals within and across populations 
through knowledge of biomarker variations worldwide, and (3) integration of 
pharmacovigilance signals across government ministries, civil society 
organizations, and other stakeholders through, for example, institutional 
innovation such as centers for panvigilance. We note that panvigilance and 
pharmacovigilance are complementary, and underscore the added value of 
panvigilance for global clinical trials. Panvigilance offers a new opportunity 
for meaningful biomarker application in clinical trials beyond traditional 
contexts such as personalized medicine. In sum, panvigilance is a systems 
approach to pharmacovigilance and poised to innovate risk governance in 
medicinal product development and clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2019.0020
PMID: 30822263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2014 Oct;21(e2):e278-86. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002512. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Machine learning-based prediction of drug-drug interactions by integrating drug 
phenotypic, therapeutic, chemical, and genomic properties.

Cheng F(1), Zhao Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Department of 
Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA 
Center for Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are an important consideration in both 
drug development and clinical application, especially for co-administered 
medications. While it is necessary to identify all possible DDIs during clinical 
trials, DDIs are frequently reported after the drugs are approved for clinical 
use, and they are a common cause of adverse drug reactions (ADR) and increasing 
healthcare costs. Computational prediction may assist in identifying potential 
DDIs during clinical trials.
METHODS: Here we propose a heterogeneous network-assisted inference (HNAI) 
framework to assist with the prediction of DDIs. First, we constructed a 
comprehensive DDI network that contained 6946 unique DDI pairs connecting 721 
approved drugs based on DrugBank data. Next, we calculated drug-drug pair 
similarities using four features: phenotypic similarity based on a comprehensive 
drug-ADR network, therapeutic similarity based on the drug Anatomical 
Therapeutic Chemical classification system, chemical structural similarity from 
SMILES data, and genomic similarity based on a large drug-target interaction 
network built using the DrugBank and Therapeutic Target Database. Finally, we 
applied five predictive models in the HNAI framework: naive Bayes, decision 
tree, k-nearest neighbor, logistic regression, and support vector machine, 
respectively.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of the HNAI 
models is 0.67 as evaluated using fivefold cross-validation. Using antipsychotic 
drugs as an example, several HNAI-predicted DDIs that involve weight gain and 
cytochrome P450 inhibition were supported by literature resources.
CONCLUSIONS: Through machine learning-based integration of drug phenotypic, 
therapeutic, structural, and genomic similarities, we demonstrated that HNAI is 
promising for uncovering DDIs in drug development and postmarketing 
surveillance.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002512
PMCID: PMC4173180
PMID: 24644270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. JMIR Med Inform. 2021 Dec 24;9(12):e28632. doi: 10.2196/28632.

Text Mining of Adverse Events in Clinical Trials: Deep Learning Approach.

Chopard D(1), Treder MS(1), Corcoran P(1), Ahmed N(2), Johnson C(2), Busse M(2), 
Spasic I(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Trials Research, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacovigilance and safety reporting, which involve processes for 
monitoring the use of medicines in clinical trials, play a critical role in the 
identification of previously unrecognized adverse events or changes in the 
patterns of adverse events.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to demonstrate the feasibility of automating the 
coding of adverse events described in the narrative section of the serious 
adverse event report forms to enable statistical analysis of the aforementioned 
patterns.
METHODS: We used the Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) as the coding scheme, 
which integrates 217 source vocabularies, thus enabling coding against other 
relevant terminologies such as the International Classification of Diseases-10th 
Revision, Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities, and Systematized 
Nomenclature of Medicine). We used MetaMap, a highly configurable dictionary 
lookup software, to identify the mentions of the UMLS concepts. We trained a 
binary classifier using Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
(BERT), a transformer-based language model that captures contextual 
relationships, to differentiate between mentions of the UMLS concepts that 
represented adverse events and those that did not.
RESULTS: The model achieved a high F1 score of 0.8080, despite the class 
imbalance. This is 10.15 percent points lower than human-like performance but 
also 17.45 percent points higher than that of the baseline approach.
CONCLUSIONS: These results confirmed that automated coding of adverse events 
described in the narrative section of serious adverse event reports is feasible. 
Once coded, adverse events can be statistically analyzed so that any 
correlations with the trialed medicines can be estimated in a timely fashion.

©Daphne Chopard, Matthias S Treder, Padraig Corcoran, Nagheen Ahmed, Claire 
Johnson, Monica Busse, Irena Spasic. Originally published in JMIR Medical 
Informatics (https://medinform.jmir.org), 24.12.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/28632
PMCID: PMC8742206
PMID: 34951601

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


135. Int J Clin Pharm. 2022 Sep 17. doi: 10.1007/s11096-022-01468-7. Online ahead of 
print.

Predicting adverse drug events in older inpatients: a machine learning study.

Hu Q(1), Wu B(1), Wu J(2), Xu T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, West China Hospital, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)The Center of Gerontology and Geriatrics, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, West China Hospital, Chengdu, 610041, China. 
tingx2009@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Building an effective prediction model of adverse drug events (ADE) 
is necessary to prevent harm caused by medication in older inpatients.
AIM: This study aimed to develop a machine learning-based prediction model for 
the prediction of ADE and explore the risk factors associated with ADEs in older 
inpatients.
METHOD: Data were from an observational, retrospective study that included 1800 
older Chinese inpatients. After dividing the patients into training and test 
sets (8:2), seven machine learning models were used. Demographic, admission, and 
treatment clinical variables were considered for model development. The 
discriminative performance of the model by the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (ROC) was evaluated. We also calculated the model's 
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores.
RESULTS: Among 1800 patients, 296 ADEs were detected in 234 (13.00%) patients. 
The main cause of ADEs was antineoplastic agents (55.74%). Seven algorithms, 
including eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), AdaBoost, CatBoost, Gradient 
Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT), Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM), 
Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT) and Random Forest (RF), were used 
to establish the prediction model. The Adaboost model was chosen with the best 
predictive ability (accuracy 88.06%, precision 68.57%, recall 48.21%, F1 52.75%, 
and AUC 0.91). Ten significant factors associated with ADEs were identified, 
including the number of true triggers (+), length of stay, doses per patient, 
age, number of admissions in the previous year, surgery, drugs per patient, 
number of medical diagnoses, antibacterial use, and gender.
CONCLUSION: Using machine learning, this novel study establishes an ADE 
prediction model in older patients. The sophisticated computer algorithm can be 
implemented at the bedside to improve patient safety in clinical practice.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11096-022-01468-7
PMID: 36115909


136. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Apr 27;12:659099. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.659099. 
eCollection 2021.

Predicting Adverse Drug Events in Chinese Pediatric Inpatients With the 
Associated Risk Factors: A Machine Learning Study.

Yu Z(1), Ji H(2), Xiao J(3), Wei P(4), Song L(2), Tang T(5), Hao X(6), Zhang 
J(1), Qi Q(1), Zhou Y(1), Gao F(1), Jia Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Department of Pharmacy, National 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Ear-nose-throat, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Medical Record, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(6)Dalian Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Dalian, China.

The aim of this study was to apply machine learning methods to deeply explore 
the risk factors associated with adverse drug events (ADEs) and predict the 
occurrence of ADEs in Chinese pediatric inpatients. Data of 1,746 patients aged 
between 28 days and 18 years (mean age = 3.84 years) were included in the study 
from January 1, 2013, to December 31, 2015, in the Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University. There were 247 cases of ADE occurrence, of which 
the most common drugs inducing ADEs were antibacterials. Seven algorithms, 
including eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), CatBoost, AdaBoost, LightGBM, 
Random Forest (RF), Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT), and TPOT, were used 
to select the important risk factors, and GBDT was chosen to establish the 
prediction model with the best predicting abilities (precision = 44%, recall = 
25%, F1 = 31.88%). The GBDT model has better performance than Global Trigger 
Tools (GTTs) for ADE prediction (precision 44 vs. 13.3%). In addition, multiple 
risk factors were identified via GBDT, such as the number of trigger true (TT) 
(+), number of doses, BMI, number of drugs, number of admission, height, length 
of hospital stay, weight, age, and number of diagnoses. The influencing 
directions of the risk factors on ADEs were displayed through Shapley Additive 
exPlanations (SHAP). This study provides a novel method to accurately predict 
adverse drug events in Chinese pediatric inpatients with the associated risk 
factors, which may be applicable in clinical practice in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Yu, Ji, Xiao, Wei, Song, Tang, Hao, Zhang, Qi, Zhou, Gao and 
Jia.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.659099
PMCID: PMC8111537
PMID: 33986685

Conflict of interest statement: ZY, JZ, QQ, YZ, FG were employed by the company 
Beijing Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China; XH was employed by the 
company Dalian Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Dalian, Liaoning Province, China. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.


137. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Jun 11;22(1):318. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04241-1.

Novel deep learning-based transcriptome data analysis for drug-drug interaction 
prediction with an application in diabetes.

Luo Q(#)(1)(2), Mo S(#)(1), Xue Y(#)(1), Zhang X(#)(1), Gu Y(#)(1), Wu L(1), 
Zhang J(3), Sun L(4), Liu M(5), Hu Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Big Data Decision Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(2)School of Management, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016, China.
(4)Xi'an Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Xi'an, 710021, China.
(5)Division of Medical Informatics, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical 
Center, University of Kansas, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. meiliu@kumc.edu.
(6)Big Data Decision Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. 
yonghu@jnu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a serious public health issue. The 
L1000 database of the LINCS project has collected millions of genome-wide 
expressions induced by 20,000 small molecular compounds on 72 cell lines. 
Whether this unified and comprehensive transcriptome data resource can be used 
to build a better DDI prediction model is still unclear. Therefore, we developed 
and validated a novel deep learning model for predicting DDI using 89,970 known 
DDIs extracted from the DrugBank database (version 5.1.4).
RESULTS: The proposed model consists of a graph convolutional autoencoder 
network (GCAN) for embedding drug-induced transcriptome data from the L1000 
database of the LINCS project; and a long short-term memory (LSTM) for DDI 
prediction. Comparative evaluation of various machine learning methods 
demonstrated the superior performance of our proposed model for DDI prediction. 
Many of our predicted DDIs were revealed in the latest DrugBank database 
(version 5.1.7). In the case study, we predicted drugs interacting with 
sulfonylureas to cause hypoglycemia and drugs interacting with metformin to 
cause lactic acidosis, and showed both to induce effects on the proteins 
involved in the metabolic mechanism in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed deep learning model can accelerate the discovery of 
new DDIs. It can support future clinical research for safer and more effective 
drug co-prescription.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-021-04241-1
PMCID: PMC8194123
PMID: 34116627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


138. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2021 May;109(5):1232-1243. doi: 10.1002/cpt.2074. Epub 2020 
Nov 7.

Target Adverse Event Profiles for Predictive Safety in the Postmarket Setting.

Schotland P(1), Racz R(1), Jackson DB(2), Soldatos TG(2), Levin R(3), Strauss 
DG(1), Burkhart K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Regulatory Science, Office of Clinical Pharmacology, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver 
Spring, Maryland, USA.
(2)Molecular Health GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.

We improved a previous pharmacological target adverse-event (TAE) profile model 
to predict adverse events (AEs) on US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) drug 
labels at the time of approval. The new model uses more drugs and features for 
learning as well as a new algorithm. Comparator drugs sharing similar target 
activities to a drug of interest were evaluated by aggregating AEs from the FDA 
Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), FDA drug labels, and medical literature. 
An ensemble machine learning model was used to evaluate FAERS case count, 
disproportionality scores, percent of comparator drug labels with a specific AE, 
and percent of comparator drugs with the reports of the event in the literature. 
Overall classifier performance was F1 of 0.71, area under the precision-recall 
curve of 0.78, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 
0.87. TAE analysis continues to show promise as a method to predict adverse 
events at the time of approval.

© 2020 Molecular Health GMBH. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.2074
PMCID: PMC8246740
PMID: 33090463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.B.J. is an employee of Molecular Health, GmbH, 
a shareholder in Molecular Health, GmbH, and inventor of the EFFECT technology; 
T.G.S. is an employee of Molecular Health, GmbH and a shareholder in Molecular 
Health, GmbH and inventor of the EFFECT technology. All other authors declare no 
competing interests for this work.


139. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2015 Jun 23;86:46-60. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2015.03.006. Epub 
2015 Mar 19.

In silico methods for predicting drug-drug interactions with cytochrome P-450s, 
transporters and beyond.

Ai N(1), Fan X(2), Ekins S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, PR China.
(2)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, PR China. 
Electronic address: fanxh@zju.edu.cn.
(3)Collaborations in Chemistry, 5616 Hilltop Needmore Road, Fuquay-Varina, NC 
27526, USA. Electronic address: ekinssean@yahoo.com.

Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are associated with severe adverse effects that 
may lead to the patient requiring alternative therapeutics and could ultimately 
lead to drug withdrawal from the market if they are severe. To prevent the 
occurrence of DDI in the clinic, experimental systems to evaluate drug 
interaction have been integrated into the various stages of the drug discovery 
and development process. A large body of knowledge about DDI has also 
accumulated through these studies and pharmacovigillence systems. Much of this 
work to date has focused on the drug metabolizing enzymes such as cytochrome 
P-450s as well as drug transporters, ion channels and occasionally other 
proteins. This combined knowledge provides a foundation for a hypothesis-driven 
in silico approach, using either cheminformatics or physiologically based 
pharmacokinetics (PK) modeling methods to assess DDI potential. Here we review 
recent advances in these approaches with emphasis on hypothesis-driven 
mechanistic models for important protein targets involved in PK-based DDI. 
Recent efforts with other informatics approaches to detect DDI are highlighted. 
Besides DDI, we also briefly introduce drug interactions with other substances, 
such as Traditional Chinese Medicines to illustrate how in silico modeling can 
be useful in this domain. We also summarize valuable data sources and web-based 
tools that are available for DDI prediction. We finally explore the challenges 
we see faced by in silico approaches for predicting DDI and propose future 
directions to make these computational models more reliable, accurate, and 
publically accessible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2015.03.006
PMID: 25796619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Front Chem. 2018 Feb 20;6:30. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2018.00030. eCollection 2018.

In Silico Prediction of Chemical Toxicity for Drug Design Using Machine Learning 
Methods and Structural Alerts.

Yang H(1), Sun L(1), Li W(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Front Chem. 2018 Apr 13;6:129.

During drug development, safety is always the most important issue, including a 
variety of toxicities and adverse drug effects, which should be evaluated in 
preclinical and clinical trial phases. This review article at first simply 
introduced the computational methods used in prediction of chemical toxicity for 
drug design, including machine learning methods and structural alerts. Machine 
learning methods have been widely applied in qualitative classification and 
quantitative regression studies, while structural alerts can be regarded as a 
complementary tool for lead optimization. The emphasis of this article was put 
on the recent progress of predictive models built for various toxicities. 
Available databases and web servers were also provided. Though the methods and 
models are very helpful for drug design, there are still some challenges and 
limitations to be improved for drug safety assessment in the future.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2018.00030
PMCID: PMC5826228
PMID: 29515993


141. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2022 Nov;31(11):1131-1139. doi: 10.1002/pds.5532. 
Epub 2022 Sep 9.

Adverse events in the digital age and where to find them.

Di Giovanni R(1), Cochrane A(1), Parker J(2), Lewis DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Chief Medical Office and Patient Safety, Global Drug Development, Novartis 
Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Enterprise Risk Management, Research and Development, ERC, Novartis Pharma 
AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Postgraduate Medicine, University of 
Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK.

Exponential growth of health-related data collected by digital tools is a 
reality within pharmaceutical and medical device research and development. Data 
generated through digital tools may be categorized as relevant to efficacy 
and/or safety. The enormity of these data requires the adoption of new 
approaches for processing and evaluation. Recognition of patterns within the 
safety data is vital for sponsors seeking regulatory approval for their new 
products. Nontraditional data sources may contain relevant safety information; 
early evaluation of these data will help to determine the product safety 
profile. Advanced technologies have allowed the development of digital tools to 
screen these data, which in some situations are classified as software as a 
medical devices and subject to clinical evaluation and post-marketing 
surveillance. Artificial intelligence may help to reduce or even eliminate noise 
from within these data, allowing safety experts to focus on the most pertinent 
evidence. We propose a data typology and provide considerations on how to define 
adverse events within different types of data, even where no human reporter 
exists. Proposals are made for the automation of screening processes. We 
consider validation aspects to support solutions that are proven to produce 
reliable results, and to deliver trusted outputs to stakeholders.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.5532
PMID: 35996833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016 Nov;9(6):621-628. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003055. Epub 2016 Nov 8.

Identifying Drug-Drug Interactions by Data Mining: A Pilot Study of 
Warfarin-Associated Drug Interactions.

Hansen PW(1), Clemmensen L(2), Sehested TS(2), Fosbøl EL(2), Torp-Pedersen C(2), 
Køber L(2), Gislason GH(2), Andersson C(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Danish Heart Foundation, Copenhagen, Denmark (P.W.H., T.S.G.S., 
E.L.F., G.H.G.); DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby (L.C.); 
The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet (E.L.F., L.K.), and Department of Clinical 
Medicine (G.H.G.), University of Copenhagen, Denmark; Institute of Health, 
Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Denmark (C.T.-P.); The National 
Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Copenhagen (G.H.G.); 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark; and Department of Medicine, Section of 
Cardiology, Glostrup Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Denmark (C.A.). 
Waede.sci@gmail.com.
(2)From the Danish Heart Foundation, Copenhagen, Denmark (P.W.H., T.S.G.S., 
E.L.F., G.H.G.); DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby (L.C.); 
The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet (E.L.F., L.K.), and Department of Clinical 
Medicine (G.H.G.), University of Copenhagen, Denmark; Institute of Health, 
Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Denmark (C.T.-P.); The National 
Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Copenhagen (G.H.G.); 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark; and Department of Medicine, Section of 
Cardiology, Glostrup Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Denmark (C.A.).

BACKGROUND: Knowledge about drug-drug interactions commonly arises from 
preclinical trials, from adverse drug reports, or based on knowledge of 
mechanisms of action. Our aim was to investigate whether drug-drug interactions 
were discoverable without prior hypotheses using data mining. We focused on 
warfarin-drug interactions as the prototype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed altered prothrombin time (measured as 
international normalized ratio [INR]) after initiation of a novel prescription 
in previously INR-stable warfarin-treated patients with nonvalvular atrial 
fibrillation. Data sets were retrieved from clinical work. Random forest (a 
machine-learning method) was set up to predict altered INR levels after novel 
prescriptions. The most important drug groups from the analysis were further 
investigated using logistic regression in a new data set. Two hundred and twenty 
drug groups were analyzed in 61 190 novel prescriptions. We rediscovered 2 drug 
groups having known interactions (β-lactamase-resistant penicillins 
[dicloxacillin] and carboxamide derivatives) and 3 antithrombotic/anticoagulant 
agents (platelet aggregation inhibitors excluding heparin, direct thrombin 
inhibitors [dabigatran etexilate], and heparins) causing decreasing INR. Six 
drug groups with known interactions were rediscovered causing increasing INR 
(antiarrhythmics class III [amiodarone], other opioids [tramadol], 
glucocorticoids, triazole derivatives, and combinations of penicillins, 
including β-lactamase inhibitors) and two had a known interaction in a closely 
related drug group (oripavine derivatives [buprenorphine] and natural opium 
alkaloids). Antipropulsives had an unknown signal of increasing INR.
CONCLUSIONS: We were able to identify known warfarin-drug interactions without a 
prior hypothesis using clinical registries. Additionally, we discovered a few 
potentially novel interactions. This opens up for the use of data mining to 
discover unknown drug-drug interactions in cardiovascular medicine.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.003055
PMID: 28263937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 Aug 16;34(8):1850-1859. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00078. Epub 2021 Jul 13.

In Silico Prediction of CYP2C8 Inhibition with Machine-Learning Methods.

Zhang X(1), Zhao P(1), Wang Z(1), Xu X(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1), Li W(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China.

Cytochrome P450 2C8 (CYP2C8) is a major drug-metabolizing enzyme in humans and 
is responsible for the metabolism of ∼5% drugs in clinical use. Thus, inhibition 
of CYP2C8, which causes potential adverse drug events, cannot be neglected. The 
in vitro drug interaction studies guidelines for industry issued by the FDA also 
point out that it needs to be determined whether investigated drugs are CYP2C8 
inhibitors before clinical trials. However, current studies mainly focus on 
predicting the inhibitors of other major P450 enzymes, and the importance of 
CYP2C8 inhibition has been overlooked. Therefore, there is a need to develop 
models for identifying potential CYP2C8 inhibition. In this study, in silico 
classification models for predicting CYP2C8 inhibition were built by five 
machine-learning methods combined with nine molecular fingerprints. The 
performance of the models built was evaluated by test and external validation 
sets. The best model had AUC values of 0.85 and 0.90 for the test and external 
validation sets, respectively. The applicability domain was analyzed based on 
the molecular similarity and exhibited an impact on the improvement of 
prediction accuracy. Furthermore, several representative privileged 
substructures such as 1H-benzo[d]imidazole, 1-phenyl-1H-pyrazole, and quinoline 
were identified by information gain and substructure frequency analysis. 
Overall, our results would be helpful for the prediction of CYP2C8 inhibition.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00078
PMID: 34255486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Chem Res Toxicol. 2018 Jun 18;31(6):412-430. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.8b00054. Epub 2018 May 10.

Advancing Predictive Hepatotoxicity at the Intersection of Experimental, in 
Silico, and Artificial Intelligence Technologies.

Fraser K(1), Bruckner DM(1), Dordick JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and Department of 
Biological Sciences Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies , 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy , New York 12180 , United States.

Adverse drug reactions, particularly those that result in drug-induced liver 
injury (DILI), are a major cause of drug failure in clinical trials and drug 
withdrawals. Hepatotoxicity-mediated drug attrition occurs despite substantial 
investments of time and money in developing cellular assays, animal models, and 
computational models to predict its occurrence in humans. Underperformance in 
predicting hepatotoxicity associated with drugs and drug candidates has been 
attributed to existing gaps in our understanding of the mechanisms involved in 
driving hepatic injury after these compounds perfuse and are metabolized by the 
liver. Herein we assess in vitro, in vivo (animal), and in silico strategies 
used to develop predictive DILI models. We address the effectiveness of several 
two- and three-dimensional in vitro cellular methods that are frequently 
employed in hepatotoxicity screens and how they can be used to predict DILI in 
humans. We also explore how humanized animal models can recapitulate human drug 
metabolic profiles and associated liver injury. Finally, we highlight the 
maturation of computational methods for predicting hepatotoxicity, the untapped 
potential of artificial intelligence for improving in silico DILI screens, and 
how knowledge acquired from these predictions can shape the refinement of 
experimental methods.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.8b00054
PMID: 29722533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Top Companion Anim Med. 2019 Dec;37:100366. doi: 10.1016/j.tcam.2019.100366. 
Epub 2019 Sep 30.

Making Sense of Pharmacovigilance and Drug Adverse Event Reporting: Comparative 
Similarity Association Analysis Using AI Machine Learning Algorithms in Dogs and 
Cats.

Xu X(1), Mazloom R(2), Goligerdian A(1), Staley J(3), Amini M(4), Wyckoff GJ(5), 
Riviere J(4), Jaberi-Douraki M(6).

Author information:
(1)1DATA Consortium, USA; Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA; Department of Anatomy and 
Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA; Department of 
Mathematics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(2)1DATA Consortium, USA; Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA; Department of Anatomy and 
Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(3)1DATA Consortium, USA; Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, K-State Olathe, 
Olathe, KS, USA.
(4)1DATA Consortium, USA; Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(5)1DATA Consortium, USA; School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas 
City, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(6)1DATA Consortium, USA; Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA; Department of Anatomy and 
Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA; Department of 
Mathematics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA. Electronic address: 
jaberi@k-state.edu.

Drug-associated adverse events cause approximately 30 billion dollars a year of 
added health care expense, along with negative health outcomes including patient 
death. This constitutes a major public health concern. The US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) requires drug labeling to include potential adverse effects 
for each newly developed drug product. With the advancement in incidence of 
adverse drug events (ADEs) and potential adverse drug events, published studies 
have mainly concluded potential ADEs from labeling documents obtained from the 
FDA's preapproval clinical trials, and very few analyzed their research work 
based on reported ADEs after widespread use of a drug to animal subjects. The 
aforesaid procedure of deriving practice based on information from preapproval 
labeling may misrepresent or deprecate the incidence and prevalence of specific 
ADEs. In this study, we make the most of the recently disseminated ADE data by 
the FDA for animal drugs and devices used in animals to address this public and 
welfare concern. For this purpose, we implemented 5 different methods (Pearson 
distance, Spearman distance, cosine distance, Yule distance, and Euclidean 
distance) to determine the most efficient and robust approach to properly 
discover highly associated ADEs from the reported data and accurately exclude 
noise-induced reported events, while maintaining a high level of correlation 
precision. Our comparative analysis of ADEs based on an artificial intelligence 
(AI) approach for the 5 robust similarity methods revealed high ADE associations 
for 2 drugs used in dogs and cats. In addition, the described distance methods 
systematically analyzed and compared ADEs from the drug labeling sections with a 
specific emphasis on analyzing serious ADEs. Our finding showed that the cosine 
method significantly outperformed all the other methods by correctly detecting 
and validating ADEs based on the comparative similarity association analysis 
compared with ADEs reported by preapproval clinical trials, premarket testing, 
or postapproval complication experience of FDA-approved animal drugs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcam.2019.100366
PMID: 31837760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Front Bioinform. 2022 Jul 14;2:906644. doi: 10.3389/fbinf.2022.906644. 
eCollection 2022.

Prediction of Adverse Drug Reaction Linked to Protein Targets Using 
Network-Based Information and Machine Learning.

Galletti C(1), Aguirre-Plans J(2), Oliva B(3), Fernandez-Fuentes N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, U Science Tech, Universitat de Vic-Universitat 
Central de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Physics, Network Science Institute, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Structural Bioinformatics 
Group, Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Spain.

Drug discovery attrition rates, particularly at advanced clinical trial stages, 
are high because of unexpected adverse drug reactions (ADR) elicited by novel 
drug candidates. Predicting undesirable ADRs produced by the modulation of 
certain protein targets would contribute to developing safer drugs, thereby 
reducing economic losses associated with high attrition rates. As opposed to the 
more traditional drug-centric approach, we propose a target-centric approach to 
predict associations between protein targets and ADRs. The implementation of the 
predictor is based on a machine learning classifier that integrates a set of 
eight independent network-based features. These include a network 
diffusion-based score, identification of protein modules based on network 
clustering algorithms, functional similarity among proteins, network distance to 
proteins that are part of safety panels used in preclinical drug development, 
set of network descriptors in the form of degree and betweenness centrality 
measurements, and conservation. This diverse set of descriptors were used to 
generate predictors based on different machine learning classifiers ranging from 
specific models for individual ADR to higher levels of abstraction as per MEDDRA 
hierarchy such as system organ class. The results obtained from the different 
machine-learning classifiers, namely, support vector machine, random forest, and 
neural network were further analyzed as a meta-predictor exploiting three 
different voting systems, namely, jury vote, consensus vote, and red flag, 
obtaining different models for each of the ADRs in analysis. The level of 
accuracy of the predictors justifies the identification of problematic protein 
targets both at the level of individual ADR as well as a set of related ADRs 
grouped in common system organ classes. As an example, the prediction of 
ventricular tachycardia achieved an accuracy and precision of 0.83 and 0.90, 
respectively, and a Matthew correlation coefficient of 0.70. We believe that 
this approach is a good complement to the existing methodologies devised to 
foresee potential liabilities in preclinical drug discovery. The method is 
available through the DocTOR utility at GitHub 
(https://github.com/cristian931/DocTOR).

Copyright © 2022 Galletti, Aguirre-Plans, Oliva and Fernandez-Fuentes.

DOI: 10.3389/fbinf.2022.906644
PMCID: PMC9580901
PMID: 36304303

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


147. Artif Intell Med. 2010 Feb-Mar;48(2-3):71-3. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2009.07.007. 
Epub 2009 Dec 31.

Artificial intelligence in biomedical engineering and informatics: an 
introduction and review.

Peng Y, Zhang Y, Wang L.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2009.07.007
PMID: 20045299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Med Inform. 2019 Aug;128:62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.04.017. Epub 
2019 May 25.

Detecting adverse drug reactions in discharge summaries of electronic medical 
records using Readpeer.

Tang Y(1), Yang J(1), Ang PS(2), Dorajoo SR(2), Foo B(2), Soh S(2), Tan SH(2), 
Tham MY(2), Ye Q(3), Shek L(4), Sung C(5), Tung A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore.
(3)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore; Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science 
and Technology, Singapore.
(4)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, National 
University Health System, Singapore.
(5)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore; Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS 
Medical School, Singapore.
(6)Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: anthony@comp.nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Hospital discharge summaries offer a potentially rich resource to 
enhance pharmacovigilance efforts to evaluate drug safety in real-world clinical 
practice. However, it is infeasible for experts to read through all discharge 
summaries to find cases of drug-adverse event (AE) relations.
PURPOSE: The objective of this paper is to develop a natural language processing 
(NLP) framework to detect drug-AE relations from unstructured hospital discharge 
summaries.
BASIC PROCEDURES: An NLP algorithm was designed using customized dictionaries of 
drugs, adverse event (AE) terms, and rules based on trigger phrases, negations, 
fuzzy logic and word distances to recognize drug, AE terms and to detect drug-AE 
relations. Furthermore, a customized annotation tool was developed to facilitate 
expert review of discharge summaries from a tertiary hospital in Singapore in 
2011.
MAIN FINDINGS: A total of 33 trial sets with 50 to 100 records per set were 
evaluated (1620 discharge summaries) by our algorithm and reviewed by 
pharmacovigilance experts. After every 6 trial sets, drug and AE dictionaries 
were updated, and rules were modified to improve the system. Excellent 
performance was achieved for drug and AE entity recognition with over 92% 
precision and recall. On the final 6 sets of discharge summaries (600 records), 
our algorithm achieved 75% precision and 59% recall for identification of valid 
drug-AE relations.
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS: Adverse drug reactions are a significant contributor to 
health care costs and utilization. Our algorithm is not restricted to particular 
drugs, drug classes or specific medical specialties, which is an important 
attribute for a national regulatory authority to carry out comprehensive safety 
monitoring of drug products. Drug and AE dictionaries may be updated 
periodically to ensure that the tool remains relevant for performing 
surveillance activities. The development of the algorithm, and the ease of 
reviewing and correcting the results of the algorithm as part of an iterative 
machine learning process, is an important step towards use of hospital discharge 
summaries for an active pharmacovigilance program.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.04.017
PMID: 31160013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Healthcare (Basel). 2022 Mar 25;10(4):618. doi: 10.3390/healthcare10040618.

Predicting Adverse Drug Reactions from Social Media Posts: Data Balance, Feature 
Selection and Deep Learning.

Huang JY(1), Lee WP(1), Lee KD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Management, National Sun Yat-sen University, 
Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Healthcare Administration and Medical Informatics, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan.

Social forums offer a lot of new channels for collecting patients' opinions to 
construct predictive models of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) for post-marketing 
surveillance. However, due to the characteristics of social posts, there are 
many challenges still to be solved when deriving such models, mainly including 
problems caused by data sparseness, data features with a high-dimensionality, 
and term diversity in data. To tackle these crucial issues related to 
identifying ADRs from social posts, we perform data analytics from the 
perspectives of data balance, feature selection, and feature learning. 
Meanwhile, we design a comprehensive experimental analysis to investigate the 
performance of different data processing techniques and data modeling methods. 
Most importantly, we present a deep learning-based approach that adopts the BERT 
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) model with a new 
batch-wise adaptive strategy to enhance the predictive performance. A series of 
experiments have been conducted to evaluate the machine learning methods with 
both manual and automated feature engineering processes. The results prove that 
with their own advantages both types of methods are effective in ADR prediction. 
In contrast to the traditional machine learning methods, our feature learning 
approach can automatically achieve the required task to save the manual effort 
for the large number of experiments.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare10040618
PMCID: PMC9024774
PMID: 35455795

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


150. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2016;11(3):241-56. doi: 10.1517/17460441.2016.1135126. 
Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Providing data science support for systems pharmacology and its implications to 
drug discovery.

Hart T(1)(2), Xie L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)a The Rockefeller University , New York , NY , USA.
(2)b Department of Biological Sciences, Hunter College , The City University of 
New York , New York , NY , USA.
(3)c Department of Computer Science, Hunter College , The City University of New 
York , New York , NY , USA.
(4)d The Graduate Center , The City University of New York , New York , NY , 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: The conventional one-drug-one-target-one-disease drug discovery 
process has been less successful in tracking multi-genic, multi-faceted complex 
diseases. Systems pharmacology has emerged as a new discipline to tackle the 
current challenges in drug discovery. The goal of systems pharmacology is to 
transform huge, heterogeneous, and dynamic biological and clinical data into 
interpretable and actionable mechanistic models for decision making in drug 
discovery and patient treatment. Thus, big data technology and data science will 
play an essential role in systems pharmacology.
AREAS COVERED: This paper critically reviews the impact of three fundamental 
concepts of data science on systems pharmacology: similarity inference, 
overfitting avoidance, and disentangling causality from correlation. The authors 
then discuss recent advances and future directions in applying the three 
concepts of data science to drug discovery, with a focus on proteome-wide 
context-specific quantitative drug target deconvolution and personalized adverse 
drug reaction prediction.
EXPERT OPINION: Data science will facilitate reducing the complexity of systems 
pharmacology modeling, detecting hidden correlations between complex data sets, 
and distinguishing causation from correlation. The power of data science can 
only be fully realized when integrated with mechanism-based multi-scale modeling 
that explicitly takes into account the hierarchical organization of biological 
systems from nucleic acid to proteins, to molecular interaction networks, to 
cells, to tissues, to patients, and to populations.

DOI: 10.1517/17460441.2016.1135126
PMCID: PMC4988863
PMID: 26689499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):65-72. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz144.

Identifying relations of medications with adverse drug events using recurrent 
convolutional neural networks and gradient boosting.

Yang X(1), Bian J(1), Fang R(2), Bjarnadottir RI(3), Hogan WR(1), Wu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Outcomes and Biomedical Informatics, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Family, Community and Health Systems Science, College of 
Nursing, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a natural language processing system that identifies 
relations of medications with adverse drug events from clinical narratives. This 
project is part of the 2018 n2c2 challenge.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We developed a novel clinical named entity recognition 
method based on an recurrent convolutional neural network and compared it to a 
recurrent neural network implemented using the long-short term memory 
architecture, explored methods to integrate medical knowledge as embedding 
layers in neural networks, and investigated 3 machine learning models, including 
support vector machines, random forests and gradient boosting for relation 
classification. The performance of our system was evaluated using annotated data 
and scripts provided by the 2018 n2c2 organizers.
RESULTS: Our system was among the top ranked. Our best model submitted during 
this challenge (based on recurrent neural networks and support vector machines) 
achieved lenient F1 scores of 0.9287 for concept extraction (ranked third), 
0.9459 for relation classification (ranked fourth), and 0.8778 for the 
end-to-end relation extraction (ranked second). We developed a novel named 
entity recognition model based on a recurrent convolutional neural network and 
further investigated gradient boosting for relation classification. The new 
methods improved the lenient F1 scores of the 3 subtasks to 0.9292, 0.9633, and 
0.8880, respectively, which are comparable to the best performance reported in 
this challenge.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the feasibility of using machine learning 
methods to extract the relations of medications with adverse drug events from 
clinical narratives.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz144
PMCID: PMC7489076
PMID: 31504605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Pharm Policy Pract. 2020 Nov 9;13(1):75. doi: 10.1186/s40545-020-00276-6.

Towards a symbiotic relationship between big data, artificial intelligence, and 
hospital pharmacy.

Del Rio-Bermudez C(1), Medrano IH(1), Yebes L(1), Poveda JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Savana Medica, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Pharmacy Department, Drug Clinical Area, University and Polytechnic Hospital 
La Fe, Avda. Fernando Abril Martorell 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain. 
poveda_josand@gva.es.

The digitalization of health and medicine and the growing availability of 
electronic health records (EHRs) has encouraged healthcare professionals and 
clinical researchers to adopt cutting-edge methodologies in the realms of 
artificial intelligence (AI) and big data analytics to exploit existing large 
medical databases. In Hospital and Health System pharmacies, the application of 
natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning to access and analyze the 
unstructured, free-text information captured in millions of EHRs (e.g., 
medication safety, patients' medication history, adverse drug reactions, 
interactions, medication errors, therapeutic outcomes, and pharmacokinetic 
consultations) may become an essential tool to improve patient care and perform 
real-time evaluations of the efficacy, safety, and comparative effectiveness of 
available drugs. This approach has an enormous potential to support share-risk 
agreements and guide decision-making in pharmacy and therapeutics (P&T) 
Committees.

DOI: 10.1186/s40545-020-00276-6
PMCID: PMC7650184
PMID: 33292570


153. J Korean Med Sci. 2021 Aug 9;36(31):e198. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2021.36.e198.

Machine Learning Approach for Active Vaccine Safety Monitoring.

Kim Y(#)(1), Jang JH(#)(1), Park N(2), Jeong NY(3), Lim E(3), Kim S(2), Choi 
NK(3), Yoon D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Systems Informatics, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Yongin, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Korea.
(3)Department of Health Convergence, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Center for Digital Health, Yongin Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
Health System, Yongin, Korea. dukyong.yoon@yonsei.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Vaccine safety surveillance is important because it is related to 
vaccine hesitancy, which affects vaccination rate. To increase confidence in 
vaccination, the active monitoring of vaccine adverse events is important. For 
effective active surveillance, we developed and verified a machine 
learning-based active surveillance system using national claim data.
METHODS: We used two databases, one from the Korea Disease Control and 
Prevention Agency, which contains flu vaccination records for the elderly, and 
another from the National Health Insurance Service, which contains the claim 
data of vaccinated people. We developed a case-crossover design based machine 
learning model to predict the health outcome of interest events (anaphylaxis and 
agranulocytosis) using a random forest. Feature importance values were evaluated 
to determine candidate associations with each outcome. We investigated the 
relationship of the features to each event via a literature review, comparison 
with the Side Effect Resource, and using the Local Interpretable Model-agnostic 
Explanation method.
RESULTS: The trained model predicted each health outcome of interest with a high 
accuracy (approximately 70%). We found literature supporting our results, and 
most of the important drug-related features were listed in the Side Effect 
Resource database as inducing the health outcome of interest. For anaphylaxis, 
flu vaccination ranked high in our feature importance analysis and had a 
positive association in Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanation analysis. 
Although the feature importance of vaccination was lower for agranulocytosis, it 
also had a positive relationship in the Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic 
Explanation analysis.
CONCLUSION: We developed a machine learning-based active surveillance system for 
detecting possible factors that can induce adverse events using health claim and 
vaccination databases. The results of the study demonstrated a potentially 
useful application of two linked national health record databases. Our model can 
contribute to the establishment of a system for conducting active surveillance 
on vaccination.

© 2021 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2021.36.e198
PMCID: PMC8352788
PMID: 34402232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DY is the founder of BUD.on Inc. BUD.on Inc. did 
not have any role in the study design, analysis, decision to publish, or the 
preparation of the manuscript. There are no patents, products in development, or 
marketed products to declare. The other authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.


154. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Feb;53:196-207. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.11.002. Epub 2014 
Nov 8.

Portable automatic text classification for adverse drug reaction detection via 
multi-corpus training.

Sarker A(1), Gonzalez G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, 13212 East 
Shea Blvd., Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA. Electronic address: abeed.sarker@asu.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, 13212 East 
Shea Blvd., Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA. Electronic address: 
graciela.gonzalez@asu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Automatic detection of adverse drug reaction (ADR) mentions from text 
has recently received significant interest in pharmacovigilance research. 
Current research focuses on various sources of text-based information, including 
social media-where enormous amounts of user posted data is available, which have 
the potential for use in pharmacovigilance if collected and filtered accurately. 
The aims of this study are: (i) to explore natural language processing (NLP) 
approaches for generating useful features from text, and utilizing them in 
optimized machine learning algorithms for automatic classification of ADR 
assertive text segments; (ii) to present two data sets that we prepared for the 
task of ADR detection from user posted internet data; and (iii) to investigate 
if combining training data from distinct corpora can improve automatic 
classification accuracies.
METHODS: One of our three data sets contains annotated sentences from clinical 
reports, and the two other data sets, built in-house, consist of annotated posts 
from social media. Our text classification approach relies on generating a large 
set of features, representing semantic properties (e.g., sentiment, polarity, 
and topic), from short text nuggets. Importantly, using our expanded feature 
sets, we combine training data from different corpora in attempts to boost 
classification accuracies.
RESULTS: Our feature-rich classification approach performs significantly better 
than previously published approaches with ADR class F-scores of 0.812 
(previously reported best: 0.770), 0.538 and 0.678 for the three data sets. 
Combining training data from multiple compatible corpora further improves the 
ADR F-scores for the in-house data sets to 0.597 (improvement of 5.9 units) and 
0.704 (improvement of 2.6 units) respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research results indicate that using advanced NLP techniques 
for generating information rich features from text can significantly improve 
classification accuracies over existing benchmarks. Our experiments illustrate 
the benefits of incorporating various semantic features such as topics, 
concepts, sentiments, and polarities. Finally, we show that integration of 
information from compatible corpora can significantly improve classification 
performance. This form of multi-corpus training may be particularly useful in 
cases where data sets are heavily imbalanced (e.g., social media data), and may 
reduce the time and costs associated with the annotation of data in the future.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.11.002
PMCID: PMC4355323
PMID: 25451103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


155. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Aug 12;12(8):762. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12080762.

Subset Analysis for Screening Drug-Drug Interaction Signal Using 
Pharmacovigilance Database.

Noguchi Y(1), Tachi T(1), Teramachi H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacy, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4, 
Daigakunishi, Gifu-shi, Gifu 501-1196, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Community Healthcare Pharmacy, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 
Daigakunishi, Gifu-shi, Gifu 501-1196, Japan.

Many patients require multi-drug combinations, and adverse event profiles 
reflect not only the effects of individual drugs but also drug-drug 
interactions. Although there are several algorithms for detecting drug-drug 
interaction signals, a simple analysis model is required for early detection of 
adverse events. Recently, there have been reports of detecting signals of 
drug-drug interactions using subset analysis, but appropriate detection 
criterion may not have been used. In this study, we presented and verified an 
appropriate criterion. The data source used was the Japanese Adverse Drug Event 
Report (JADER) database; "hypothetical" true data were generated through a 
combination of signals detected by three detection algorithms. The accuracy of 
the signal detection of the analytic model under investigation was verified 
using indicators used in machine learning. The newly proposed subset analysis 
confirmed that the signal detection was improved, compared with signal detection 
in the previous subset analysis, on the basis of the indicators of Accuracy 
(0.584 to 0.809), Precision (= Positive predictive value; PPV) (0.302 to 0.596), 
Specificity (0.583 to 0.878), Youden's index (0.170 to 0.465), F-measure (0.399 
to 0.592), and Negative predictive value (NPV) (0.821 to 0.874). The previous 
subset analysis detected many false drug-drug interaction signals. Although the 
newly proposed subset analysis provides slightly lower detection accuracy for 
drug-drug interaction signals compared to signals compared to the Ω shrinkage 
measure model, the criteria used in the newly subset analysis significantly 
reduced the amount of falsely detected signals found in the previous subset 
analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12080762
PMCID: PMC7466158
PMID: 32806518

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


156. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jan 14;11:568659. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.568659. 
eCollection 2020.

Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacoepidemiology: A Systematic Review. Part 
2-Comparison of the Performance of Artificial Intelligence and Traditional 
Pharmacoepidemiological Techniques.

Sessa M(1), Liang D(1), Khan AR(1)(2), Kulahci M(2)(3), Andersen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University 
of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)Department of Business Administration, Technology and Social Sciences, Luleå 
University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden.

Aim: To summarize the evidence on the performance of artificial intelligence vs. 
traditional pharmacoepidemiological techniques. Methods: Ovid MEDLINE (01/1950 
to 05/2019) was searched to identify observational studies, meta-analyses, and 
clinical trials using artificial intelligence techniques having a drug as the 
exposure or the outcome of the study. Only studies with an available full text 
in the English language were evaluated. Results: In all, 72 original articles 
and five reviews were identified via Ovid MEDLINE of which 19 (26.4%) compared 
the performance of artificial intelligence techniques with traditional 
pharmacoepidemiological methods. In total, 44 comparisons have been performed in 
articles that aimed at 1) predicting the needed dosage given the patient's 
characteristics (31.8%), 2) predicting the clinical response following a 
pharmacological treatment (29.5%), 3) predicting the occurrence/severity of 
adverse drug reactions (20.5%), 4) predicting the propensity score (9.1%), 5) 
identifying subpopulation more at risk of drug inefficacy (4.5%), 6) predicting 
drug consumption (2.3%), and 7) predicting drug-induced lengths of stay in 
hospital (2.3%). In 22 out of 44 (50.0%) comparisons, artificial intelligence 
performed better than traditional pharmacoepidemiological techniques. Random 
forest (seven out of 11 comparisons; 63.6%) and artificial neural network (six 
out of 10 comparisons; 60.0%) were the techniques that in most of the 
comparisons outperformed traditional pharmacoepidemiological methods. 
Conclusion: Only a small fraction of articles compared the performance of 
artificial intelligence techniques with traditional pharmacoepidemiological 
methods and not all artificial intelligence techniques have been compared in a 
Pharmacoepidemiological setting. However, in 50% of comparisons, artificial 
intelligence performed better than pharmacoepidemiological techniques.

Copyright © 2021 Sessa, Liang, Khan, Kulahci and Andersen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.568659
PMCID: PMC7841344
PMID: 33519433

Conflict of interest statement: DL, MA, and MS belong to the Pharmacovigilance 
Research Center, Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of 
Copenhagen. DL has been an employee (e.g., a student assistant) of Alcon and 
Novartis in the period 2017–2019. MA reports grants from Novartis, grants from 
Pfizer, grants from Janssen, grants from AstraZeneca, grants from H. Lundbeck 
and Mertz, grants from Novo Nordisk Foundation, outside the submitted work; and 
personal fees from Medicademy, the Danish Pharmaceutical Industry Association, 
for leading and teaching pharmacoepidemiology courses. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


157. J Biomed Inform. 2022 Jun;130:104074. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104074. Epub 2022 
Apr 22.

Decision-support systems for managing polypharmacy in the elderly: A scoping 
review.

Mouazer A(1), Tsopra R(2), Sedki K(3), Letord C(4), Lamy JB(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, LIMICS, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, F-93000 
Bobigny, France. Electronic address: malikmouazer@gmail.com.
(2)INSERM, Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Centre de Recherche des 
Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France; INRIA, HeKA, INRIA Paris, France; Department 
of Medical Informatics, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(3)Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, LIMICS, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, F-93000 
Bobigny, France.
(4)Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, LIMICS, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, F-93000 
Bobigny, France; Department of Biomedical Informatics, Rouen University 
Hospital, Normandy, France.

Polypharmacy, the consuming of more than five drugs, is a public health problem. 
It can lead to many interactions and adverse drug reactions and is very 
expensive. Therapeutic guidelines for managing polypharmacy in the elderly have 
been issued, but are highly complex, limiting their use. Decision-support 
systems have therefore been developed to automate the execution of these 
guidelines, or to provide information about drugs adapted to the context of 
polypharmacy. These systems differ widely in terms of their technical design, 
knowledge sources and evaluation methods. We present here a scoping review of 
electronic systems for supporting the management, by healthcare providers, of 
polypharmacy in elderly patients. Most existing reviews have focused mainly on 
evaluation results, whereas the present review also describes the technical 
design of these systems and the methodologies for developing and evaluating 
them. A systematic bibliographic search identified 19 systems differing 
considerably in terms of their technical design (rule-based systems, documentary 
approach, mixed); outputs (textual report, alerts and/or visual approaches); and 
evaluations (impact on clinical practices, impact on patient outcomes, 
efficiency and/or user satisfaction). The evaluations performed are minimal 
(among all the systems identified, only one system has been evaluated according 
to all the criteria mentioned above) and no machine learning systems and/or 
conflict management systems were retrieved. This review highlights the need to 
develop new methodologies, combining various approaches for decision support 
system in polypharmacy.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104074
PMID: 35470079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Jul 1;26(7):646-654. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz018.

An investigation of single-domain and multidomain medication and adverse drug 
event relation extraction from electronic health record notes using advanced 
deep learning models.

Li F(1)(2), Yu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Bedford 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We aim to evaluate the effectiveness of advanced deep learning models 
(eg, capsule network [CapNet], adversarial training [ADV]) for single-domain and 
multidomain relation extraction from electronic health record (EHR) notes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We built multiple deep learning models with increased 
complexity, namely a multilayer perceptron (MLP) model and a CapNet model for 
single-domain relation extraction and fully shared (FS), shared-private (SP), 
and adversarial training (ADV) modes for multidomain relation extraction. Our 
models were evaluated in 2 ways: first, we compared our models using our 
expert-annotated cancer (the MADE1.0 corpus) and cardio corpora; second, we 
compared our models with the systems in the MADE1.0 and i2b2 challenges.
RESULTS: Multidomain models outperform single-domain models by 0.7%-1.4% in F1 
(t test P < .05), but the results of FS, SP, and ADV modes are mixed. Our 
results show that the MLP model generally outperforms the CapNet model by 
0.1%-1.0% in F1. In the comparisons with other systems, the CapNet model 
achieves the state-of-the-art result (87.2% in F1) in the cancer corpus and the 
MLP model generally outperforms MedEx in the cancer, cardiovascular diseases, 
and i2b2 corpora.
CONCLUSIONS: Our MLP or CapNet model generally outperforms other 
state-of-the-art systems in medication and adverse drug event relation 
extraction. Multidomain models perform better than single-domain models. 
However, neither the SP nor the ADV mode can always outperform the FS mode 
significantly. Moreover, the CapNet model is not superior to the MLP model for 
our corpora.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz018
PMCID: PMC6562161
PMID: 30938761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2019 Jul;176:33-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.04.029. Epub 2019 Apr 30.

An adverse drug effect mentions extraction method based on weighted online 
recurrent extreme learning machine.

El-Allaly ED(1), Sarrouti M(2), En-Nahnahi N(3), Ouatik El Alaoui S(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Informatics and Modeling, FSDM, Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah 
University, Fez, Morocco. Electronic address: eddrissiya.elallaly@usmba.ac.ma.
(2)Laboratory of Informatics and Modeling, FSDM, Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah 
University, Fez, Morocco. Electronic address: mourad.sarrouti@usmba.ac.ma.
(3)Laboratory of Informatics and Modeling, FSDM, Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah 
University, Fez, Morocco. Electronic address: noureddine.en-nahnahi@usmba.ac.ma.
(4)Laboratory of Informatics and Modeling, FSDM, Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah 
University, Fez, Morocco. Electronic address: said.ouatikelalaoui@usmba.ac.ma.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Automatic extraction of adverse drug effect (ADE) 
mentions from biomedical texts is a challenging research problem that has 
attracted significant attention from the pharmacovigilance and biomedical text 
mining communities. Indeed, deep learning based methods have recently been 
employed to solve this issue with great success. However, they fail to 
effectively identify the boundary of mentions. In this paper, we propose a 
weighted online recurrent extreme learning machine (WOR-ELM) based method to 
overcome this drawback.
METHODS: The proposed method for ADE mentions extraction from biomedical texts 
is divided into two stages: span detection and ADE mentions classification. At 
the first stage, we identify the boundary of the mentions irrespective of their 
types with a WOR-ELM in a given sentence. At the second stage, another WOR-ELM 
is used to classify the identified mentions to the appropriate type. Both stages 
use the concatenation of character-level and word-level embeddings as features. 
The character-level embedding is obtained using a modified online recurrent 
extreme learning machine, whereas the word-level embedding is obtained from a 
pre-trained model.
RESULTS: Several experiments were carried out on a well-known ADE corpus to 
evaluate the effectiveness and demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed 
method. The obtained results show that our method achieves an F-score of 87.5%, 
which outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research results indicate that the proposed method for adverse 
drug effect mentions extraction from text can significantly improve performance 
over existing methods. Our experiments show the effectiveness of incorporating 
word-level and character level embeddings as features for WOR-ELM. They also 
illustrate the benefits of using IOU segment to represent ADE mentions.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.04.029
PMID: 31200909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):439-448. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01164-5. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Industry Perspective on Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning in 
Pharmacovigilance.

Kassekert R(1), Grabowski N(2), Lorenz D(3), Schaffer C(4), Kempf D(5), Roy 
P(6)(7), Kjoersvik O(8), Saldana G(9), ElShal S(10).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, Global Safety, Upper Providence, PA, USA.
(2)AbbVie, Pharmacovigilance and Patient Safety Business Process Office, North 
Chicago, IL, USA. neal.grabowski@abbvie.com.
(3)Bayer AG, Medical Affairs and Pharmacovigilance, Pharmaceuticals, Berlin, 
Germany.
(4)Merck Healthcare, Case and Vendor Management-Global Patient Safety, 
Darmstadt, Germany.
(5)Genentech, A Member of the Roche Group, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Novartis, Chief Medical Office and Patient Safety, Novartis Global Drug 
Development, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)MSD, R&D IT, Prague, Czech Republic.
(9)Amgen, Pharmacovigilance Operations, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)UCB, IT Patient Safety, Brussels, Belgium.

TransCelerate reports on the results of 2019, 2020, and 2021 member company (MC) 
surveys on the use of intelligent automation in pharmacovigilance processes. MCs 
increased the number and extent of implementation of intelligent automation 
solutions throughout Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR) processing, especially 
with rule-based automations such as robotic process automation, lookups, and 
workflows, moving from planning to piloting to implementation over the 3 survey 
years. Companies remain highly interested in other technologies such as machine 
learning (ML) and artificial intelligence, which can deliver a human-like 
interpretation of data and decision making rather than just automating tasks. 
Intelligent automation solutions are usually used in combination with more than 
one technology being used simultaneously for the same ICSR process step. 
Challenges to implementing intelligent automation solutions include 
finding/having appropriate training data for ML models and the need for 
harmonized regulatory guidance.

© 2022. TransCelerate BioPharma Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01164-5
PMCID: PMC9114066
PMID: 35579809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Raymond Kassekert, Neal Grabowski, Denny Lorenz, 
Claudia Schaffer, Dieter Kempf, Promit Roy, Oeystein Kjoersvik, Griselda Saldana 
and Sarah ElShal declare no conflicts of interest; however, all authors 
affiliated with pharmaceutical companies are employees and, in some cases, 
stockholders of the companies.


161. Pharmaceut Med. 2019 Dec;33(6):499-510. doi: 10.1007/s40290-019-00307-x.

Adverse Drug Reaction Case Safety Practices in Large Biopharmaceutical 
Organizations from 2007 to 2017: An Industry Survey.

Stergiopoulos S(1), Fehrle M(2), Caubel P(3), Tan L(4), Jebson L(4).

Author information:
(1)Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, 75 Kneeland Street, Ste 1100, Boston, MA, 02111, USA. 
Stella.Stergiopoulos@tufts.edu.
(2)Bayer AG, 51368, Leverkusen, Germany.
(3)Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, 10017, USA.
(4)Pvnet®, Navitas Life Sciences GmbH, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany.

Erratum in
    Pharmaceut Med. 2020 Feb;34(1):81.

INTRODUCTION: Drug safety remains a top global public health concern. An 
increase in the number of data sources available has increased the complexity of 
pharmacovigilance operations, so the US FDA has created draft guidance focusing 
on optimizing drug safety data for well-characterized medicines. However, to 
date, no data demonstrating changes in reports have been presented.
OBJECTIVES: This study provided data assessing changes in individual case safety 
reports (ICSRs) and aggregate reports (ARs) for large biopharmaceutical 
companies from 2007 to 2017. This study also evaluated current trends on the use 
of advanced machine and deep learning in order to process all data captured for 
ICSRs as well as opinions from industry thought leaders on creating a 
sustainable case-processing operation.
METHODOLOGY: Using data captured from Navitas Life Science's annual pvnet® 
benchmark, we calculated workload indicators characterizing pharmacovigilance 
operations for large biopharmaceutical organizations. Workload indicators 
included the number of ICSRs by organization, the number of ARs, and the number 
and types of data sources used. We also conducted structured in-depth interviews 
with seven biopharmaceutical executives to discover the reasons for changes in 
workload indicators across time as well as current strategies for increasing 
efficiencies in drug safety reporting.
RESULTS: The median number of ICSRs increased from 84,960 cases in 2007 to over 
200,000 cases in 2017; this increase was largely attributable to an increase in 
both nonserious cases and follow-up cases. Member companies reported using 
12 ± 3 data sources for case identification. The number of ARs also increased 
from a median of 70 reports in 2007 to 258 reports in 2017. To address these 
increases, 61% of the biopharmaceutical organizations we surveyed planned to 
adopt machine learning for full ICSR processing; however, as of 2018, none of 
the organizations surveyed had mechanisms in place.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that pharmacovigilance departments are 
currently burdened by ever-increasing case volumes. With increased guidance from 
regulatory agencies, as well as improvements in artificial intelligence and 
natural language processing, biopharmaceutical organizations must determine the 
most resource-efficient and sustainable methods to process the growing volume of 
cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-019-00307-x
PMID: 31933240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2020 Jun 16;270:48-52. doi: 10.3233/SHTI200120.

Automatic Classification of Discharge Letters to Detect Adverse Drug Reactions.

Foufi V(1), Ing Lorenzini K(2), Goldman JP(1), Gaudet-Blavignac C(1), Lovis 
C(1), Samer C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Information Sciences, Geneva University Hospitals & 
University of Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geneva University Hospitals, 
Switzerland.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are frequent and associated to significant 
morbidity, mortality and costs. Therefore, their early detection in the hospital 
context is vital. Automatic tools could be developed taking into account 
structured and textual data. In this paper, we present the methodology followed 
for the manual annotation and automatic classification of discharge letters from 
a tertiary hospital. The results show that ADRs and causal drugs are explicitly 
mentioned in the discharge letters and that machine learning algorithms are 
efficient for the automatic detection of documents containing mentions of ADRs.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI200120
PMID: 32570344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biomolecules. 2021 Jun 25;11(7):944. doi: 10.3390/biom11070944.

Molecular Initiating Events Associated with Drug-Induced Liver Malignant Tumors: 
An Integrated Study of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System and Toxicity 
Predictions.

Kurosaki K(1), Uesawa Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Informatics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 
2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588, Japan.

Liver malignant tumors (LMTs) represent a serious adverse drug event associated 
with drug-induced liver injury. Increases in endocrine-disrupting chemicals 
(EDCs) have attracted attention in recent years, due to their liver 
function-inhibiting abilities. Exposure to EDCs can induce nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, which are major etiologies of 
LMTs, through interaction with nuclear receptors (NR) and stress response 
pathways (SRs). Therefore, exposure to potential EDC drugs could be associated 
with drug-induced LMTs. However, the drug classes associated with LMTs and the 
molecular initiating events (MIEs) that are specific to these drugs are not well 
understood. In this study, using the Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event 
Reporting System, we detected LMT-inducing drug signals based on adjusted odds 
ratios. Furthermore, based on the hypothesis that drug-induced LMTs are 
triggered by NR and SR modulation of potential EDCs, we used the quantitative 
structure-activity relationship platform for toxicity prediction to identify 
potential MIEs that are specific to LMT-inducing drug classes. Events related to 
cell proliferation and apoptosis, DNA damage, and lipid accumulation were 
identified as potential MIEs, and their relevance to LMTs was supported by the 
literature. The findings of this study may contribute to drug development and 
research, as well as regulatory decision making.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11070944
PMCID: PMC8301945
PMID: 34202146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


164. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2015 Oct 11;9(Suppl 3):21-9. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S29466. 
eCollection 2015.

Machine Learning Methods for Predicting HLA-Peptide Binding Activity.

Luo H(1), Ye H(2), Ng HW(2), Shi L(3), Tong W(2), Mendrick DL(2), Hong H(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA. ; University of Arkansas at Little 
Rock/University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Bioinformatics Graduate 
Program, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(2)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA.
(3)Center for Pharmacogenomics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

As major histocompatibility complexes in humans, the human leukocyte antigens 
(HLAs) have important functions to present antigen peptides onto T-cell 
receptors for immunological recognition and responses. Interpreting and 
predicting HLA-peptide binding are important to study T-cell epitopes, immune 
reactions, and the mechanisms of adverse drug reactions. We review different 
types of machine learning methods and tools that have been used for HLA-peptide 
binding prediction. We also summarize the descriptors based on which the 
HLA-peptide binding prediction models have been constructed and discuss the 
limitation and challenges of the current methods. Lastly, we give a future 
perspective on the HLA-peptide binding prediction method based on network 
analysis.

DOI: 10.4137/BBI.S29466
PMCID: PMC4603527
PMID: 26512199


165. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2022 Sep;21(9):1193-1204. doi: 
10.1080/14740338.2022.2118712. Epub 2022 Sep 1.

A new paradigm in adverse drug reaction reporting: consolidating the evidence 
for an intervention to improve reporting.

Li R(1), Curtis K(1), Zaidi ST(2), Van C(1), Castelino R(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Adverse drug reaction (ADR) under-reporting is highly prevalent 
internationally and interventions created to address this problem have only been 
temporarily successful. This review aims to investigate how to leverage digital 
applications and automation across the healthcare industry to improve the 
quantity and quality of ADR reporting.
AREAS COVERED: This review investigated the significance of ADR under-reporting, 
the barriers of reporting ADRs, and the magnitude of success of various 
interventions to improve ADR reporting by searching the EMBASE and MEDLINE 
databases to include studies published between January 2000 and February 2022. 
This data was integrated with a view to describe a future ADR reporting 
framework.
EXPERT OPINION: Digital transformation has presented a significant opportunity 
with vast quantities of patient health data becoming available in electronic 
formats. The application of artificial intelligence to detect ADRs and then 
using automation to report these directly to regulatory agencies without human 
input would significantly enhance the quantity and quality of ADR reporting. 
Emphasis should be placed on ADRs identified for newly approved or black 
triangle medicines. Future studies are needed to measure the success of this ADR 
reporting framework in reducing the time taken to identify new safety issues and 
improving patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2022.2118712
PMID: 36031811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Fam Pract. 2017 Jun 6;18(1):70. doi: 10.1186/s12875-017-0642-0.

Current and future perspectives on the management of polypharmacy.

Molokhia M(1), Majeed A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Primary Care and Public Health Sciences, King's College London, 
London, SE1 3QD, UK.
(2)Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, W6 
8RP, London, UK. a.majeed@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Because of ageing populations, the growth in the number of people 
with multi-morbidity and greater compliance with disease-specific guidelines, 
polypharmacy is becoming increasingly common. Although the correct drug 
treatment in patients with complex medical problems can improve clinical 
outcomes, quality of life and life expectancy, polypharmacy is also associated 
with an increased risk of adverse drug events, some severe enough to result in 
hospital admission and even death. Hence, having systems in place to ensure that 
medications are started only when there is a suitable indication, ensuring 
patients are fully aware of the benefits and complications that may arise from 
their treatment, and reviewing patients regularly to ensure their medication 
regime remains appropriate, are essential.
DISCUSSION: The development and rapid uptake of electronic patient records - 
particularly in primary care settings where the majority of prescribing takes 
place - makes monitoring of patients more straightforward than in the past; and 
allows identification of sub-groups of patients at particularly high risk of 
adverse drug events and complications. It also facilitates 'deprescribing' the 
process by which medications are reviewed and stopped if not clinically 
beneficial. In recent years, we have also seen the development of smartphone 
'apps' to improve communication between patients and healthcare professionals, 
improve people's understanding of their conditions and their treatment, and 
maintain a record of changes made to patient's medication. In the longer term, 
developments such as the introduction of artificial intelligence and clinical 
decision support systems also have the potential to improve prescribing and 
minimise the risks from polypharmacy. Finally, there is considerable scope to 
improve the quality of prescribing and reduce risks from poly-pharmacy using 
non-medical groups such as pharmacists, specialist nurses and physician 
assistants. Polypharmacy has increased in recent decades and will continue to 
increase as populations age and the number of people with multiple long-term 
conditions increases. As with all areas of medicine, the evidence-base in this 
area continues to evolve. Further trials on the impact on patients with 
polypharmacy of new interventions such as technology-based solutions and the use 
of different professional groups are needed to improve the evidence-base in this 
area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-017-0642-0
PMCID: PMC5461681
PMID: 28587644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012 Jun;19(e1):e28-35. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000699.

Large-scale prediction of adverse drug reactions using chemical, biological, and 
phenotypic properties of drugs.

Liu M(1), Wu Y, Chen Y, Sun J, Zhao Z, Chen XW, Matheny ME, Xu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University, School of 
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Adverse drug reaction (ADR) is one of the major causes of failure in 
drug development. Severe ADRs that go undetected until the post-marketing phase 
of a drug often lead to patient morbidity. Accurate prediction of potential ADRs 
is required in the entire life cycle of a drug, including early stages of drug 
design, different phases of clinical trials, and post-marketing surveillance.
METHODS: Many studies have utilized either chemical structures or molecular 
pathways of the drugs to predict ADRs. Here, the authors propose a 
machine-learning-based approach for ADR prediction by integrating the phenotypic 
characteristics of a drug, including indications and other known ADRs, with the 
drug's chemical structures and biological properties, including protein targets 
and pathway information. A large-scale study was conducted to predict 1385 known 
ADRs of 832 approved drugs, and five machine-learning algorithms for this task 
were compared.
RESULTS: This evaluation, based on a fivefold cross-validation, showed that the 
support vector machine algorithm outperformed the others. Of the three types of 
information, phenotypic data were the most informative for ADR prediction. When 
biological and phenotypic features were added to the baseline chemical 
information, the ADR prediction model achieved significant improvements in area 
under the curve (from 0.9054 to 0.9524), precision (from 43.37% to 66.17%), and 
recall (from 49.25% to 63.06%). Most importantly, the proposed model 
successfully predicted the ADRs associated with withdrawal of rofecoxib and 
cerivastatin.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that phenotypic information on drugs is valuable 
for ADR prediction. Moreover, they demonstrate that different models that 
combine chemical, biological, or phenotypic information can be built from 
approved drugs, and they have the potential to detect clinically important ADRs 
in both preclinical and post-marketing phases.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000699
PMCID: PMC3392844
PMID: 22718037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


168. J Healthc Eng. 2022 Aug 19;2022:6278854. doi: 10.1155/2022/6278854. eCollection 
2022.

Machine Learning for Predicting Hyperglycemic Cases Induced by PD-1/PD-L1 
Inhibitors.

Yang J(1), Li N(2), Lin W(1), Shi L(1), Deng M(1), Tong Q(3), Yang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Office for Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Quality Control, National Cancer 
Center, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Cancer Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Comprehensive Oncology, National Cancer Center, National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Wuhan Xinzhou District Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

OBJECTIVE: Immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as programmed death-1/ligand-1 
(PD-1/L1), exhibited autoimmune-like disorders, and hyperglycemia was on the top 
of grade 3 or higher immune-related adverse events. Machine learning is a model 
from past data for future data prediction. From post-marketing monitoring, we 
aimed to construct a machine learning algorithm to efficiently and rapidly 
predict hyperglycemic adverse reaction in patients using PD-1/L1 inhibitors.
METHODS: In original data downloaded from Food and Drug Administration Adverse 
Event Reporting System (US FAERS), a multivariate pattern classification of 
support vector machine (SVM) was used to construct a classifier to separate 
adverse hyperglycemic reaction patients. With correct core SVM function, a 
10-fold 3-time cross validation optimized parameter value composition in model 
setup with R language software.
RESULTS: The SVM prediction model was set up from the number type/number 
optimization method, as well as the kernel and type of "rbf" and "nu-regression" 
composition. Two key values (nu and gamma) and case number displayed high 
adjusted r 2 in curve regressions (nu = 0.5649 × e (- (case/6984)), gamma = 
9.005 × 10-4 × case - 4.877 × 10-8 × case2). This SVM model with computable 
parameters greatly improved the assessing indexes (accuracy, F1 score, and 
kappa) as well as coequal sensitivity and the area under the curve (AUC).
CONCLUSION: We constructed an effective machine learning model based on 
compositions of exact kernels and computable parameters; the SVM prediction 
model can noninvasively and precisely predict hyperglycemic adverse drug 
reaction (ADR) in patients treated with PD-1/L1 inhibitors, which could greatly 
help clinical practitioners to identify high-risk patients and perform 
preventive measurements in time. Besides, this model setup process provided an 
analytic conception for promotion to other ADR prediction, such ADR information 
is vital for outcome improvement by identifying high-risk patients, and this 
machine learning algorithm can eventually add value to clinical decision making.

Copyright © 2022 Jincheng Yang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/6278854
PMCID: PMC9417778
PMID: 36032541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare that there are no 
conflicts of interest.


169. PLoS Comput Biol. 2022 Jan 26;18(1):e1009820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009820. 
eCollection 2022 Jan.

Machine learning-driven identification of drugs inhibiting cytochrome P450 2C9.

Goldwaser E(1), Laurent C(2), Lagarde N(3), Fabrega S(4), Nay L(4), Villoutreix 
BO(5), Jelsch C(6), Nicot AB(7), Loriot MA(2)(8), Miteva MA(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1268 « Medicinal Chemistry and Translational Research », UMR 8038 
CiTCoM, CNRS-University of Paris, Paris, France.
(2)University of Paris, INSERM U1138, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire GBCM, EA7528, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, 2 Rue 
Conté, Hésam Université, Paris, France.
(4)Viral Vector for Gene Transfer core facility, Université de Paris-Structure 
Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.
(5)INSERM UMR 1141, Robert-Debré Hospital, Paris, France.
(6)CRM2, UMR CNRS 7036, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(7)INSERM, Nantes Université, Center for Research in Transplantation and 
Translational Immunology, UMR 1064, ITUN, Nantes, France.
(8)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Service de Biochimie, Paris, France.

Cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) is a major drug-metabolizing enzyme that represents 
20% of the hepatic CYPs and is responsible for the metabolism of 15% of drugs. A 
general concern in drug discovery is to avoid the inhibition of CYP leading to 
toxic drug accumulation and adverse drug-drug interactions. However, the 
prediction of CYP inhibition remains challenging due to its complexity. We 
developed an original machine learning approach for the prediction of drug-like 
molecules inhibiting CYP2C9. We created new predictive models by integrating 
CYP2C9 protein structure and dynamics knowledge, an original selection of 
physicochemical properties of CYP2C9 inhibitors, and machine learning modeling. 
We tested the machine learning models on publicly available data and 
demonstrated that our models successfully predicted CYP2C9 inhibitors with an 
accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of approximately 80%. We experimentally 
validated the developed approach and provided the first identification of the 
drugs vatalanib, piriqualone, ticagrelor and cloperidone as strong inhibitors of 
CYP2C9 with IC values <18 μM and sertindole, asapiprant, duvelisib and dasatinib 
as moderate inhibitors with IC50 values between 40 and 85 μM. Vatalanib was 
identified as the strongest inhibitor with an IC50 value of 0.067 μM. Metabolism 
assays allowed the characterization of specific metabolites of abemaciclib, 
cloperidone, vatalanib and tarafenacin produced by CYP2C9. The obtained results 
demonstrate that such a strategy could improve the prediction of drug-drug 
interactions in clinical practice and could be utilized to prioritize drug 
candidates in drug discovery pipelines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009820
PMCID: PMC8820617
PMID: 35081108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


170. JMIR Med Inform. 2021 Dec 1;9(12):e26407. doi: 10.2196/26407.

Chinese-Named Entity Recognition From Adverse Drug Event Records: Radical 
Embedding-Combined Dynamic Embedding-Based BERT in a Bidirectional Long 
Short-term Conditional Random Field (Bi-LSTM-CRF) Model.

Wu H(1), Ji J(2), Tian H(3), Chen Y(1), Ge W(4), Zhang H(4), Yu F(2), Zou J(5), 
Nakamura M(6), Liao J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(3)School of Computer Engineering, Jinling Institute of Technology, Nanjing, 
China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(6)Laboratory of Drug Informatics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: With the increasing variety of drugs, the incidence of adverse drug 
events (ADEs) is increasing year by year. Massive numbers of ADEs are recorded 
in electronic medical records and adverse drug reaction (ADR) reports, which are 
important sources of potential ADR information. Meanwhile, it is essential to 
make latent ADR information automatically available for better postmarketing 
drug safety reevaluation and pharmacovigilance.
OBJECTIVE: This study describes how to identify ADR-related information from 
Chinese ADE reports.
METHODS: Our study established an efficient automated tool, named BBC-Radical. 
BBC-Radical is a model that consists of 3 components: Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers (BERT), bidirectional long short-term memory 
(bi-LSTM), and conditional random field (CRF). The model identifies ADR-related 
information from Chinese ADR reports. Token features and radical features of 
Chinese characters were used to represent the common meaning of a group of 
words. BERT and Bi-LSTM-CRF were novel models that combined these features to 
conduct named entity recognition (NER) tasks in the free-text section of 24,890 
ADR reports from the Jiangsu Province Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring Center 
from 2010 to 2016. Moreover, the man-machine comparison experiment on the ADE 
records from Drum Tower Hospital was designed to compare the NER performance 
between the BBC-Radical model and a manual method.
RESULTS: The NER model achieved relatively high performance, with a precision of 
96.4%, recall of 96.0%, and F1 score of 96.2%. This indicates that the 
performance of the BBC-Radical model (precision 87.2%, recall 85.7%, and F1 
score 86.4%) is much better than that of the manual method (precision 86.1%, 
recall 73.8%, and F1 score 79.5%) in the recognition task of each kind of 
entity.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed model was competitive in extracting ADR-related 
information from ADE reports, and the results suggest that the application of 
our method to extract ADR-related information is of great significance in 
improving the quality of ADR reports and postmarketing drug safety evaluation.

©Hong Wu, Jiatong Ji, Haimei Tian, Yao Chen, Weihong Ge, Haixia Zhang, Feng Yu, 
Jianjun Zou, Mitsuhiro Nakamura, Jun Liao. Originally published in JMIR Medical 
Informatics (https://medinform.jmir.org), 01.12.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/26407
PMCID: PMC8686410
PMID: 34855616

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


171. Pharmaceut Med. 2022 Oct;36(5):295-306. doi: 10.1007/s40290-022-00441-z. Epub 
2022 Jul 29.

The Use of Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacovigilance: A Systematic Review of 
the Literature.

Salas M(1), Petracek J(2), Yalamanchili P(3), Aimer O(4), Kasthuril D(5), 
Dhingra S(6), Junaid T(7), Bostic T(8).

Author information:
(1)Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. & Center for Real-World Effectiveness and Safety of 
Therapeutics (CREST), University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, 211 Mount Airy Rd, Basking Ridge, NJ, USA.
(2)Institute of Pharmacovigilance, Hvezdova 2b, 14000, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. & Rutgers University, 211 Mount Airy Rd, Basking Ridge, 
NJ, USA. pyalamanchi@dsi.com.
(4)Innovigilance, Laval, QC, Canada.
(5)Labcorp Drug Development, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacy Practice, National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER), Hajipur, India.
(7)Syneos Health, Morrisville, NC, USA.
(8)PPD, part of Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Artificial intelligence through machine learning uses algorithms 
and prior learnings to make predictions. Recently, there has been interest to 
include more artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance of products already in 
the market and pharmaceuticals in development.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify and describe the uses of 
artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance through a systematic literature 
review.
METHODS: Embase and MEDLINE database searches were conducted for articles 
published from January 1, 2015 to July 9, 2021 using search terms such as 
'pharmacovigilance,' 'patient safety,' 'artificial intelligence,' and 'machine 
learning' in the title or abstract. Scientific articles that contained 
information on the use of artificial intelligence in all modalities of patient 
safety or pharmacovigilance were reviewed and synthesized using a pre-specified 
data extraction template. Articles with incomplete information and letters to 
editor, notes, and commentaries were excluded.
RESULTS: Sixty-six articles were identified for evaluation. Most relevant 
articles on artificial intelligence focused on machine learning, and it was used 
in patient safety in the identification of adverse drug events (ADEs) and 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) (57.6%), processing safety reports (21.2%), 
extraction of drug-drug interactions (7.6%), identification of populations at 
high risk for drug toxicity or guidance for personalized care (7.6%), prediction 
of side effects (3.0%), simulation of clinical trials (1.5%), and integration of 
prediction uncertainties into diagnostic classifiers to increase patient safety 
(1.5%). Artificial intelligence has been used to identify safety signals through 
automated processes and training with machine learning models; however, the 
findings may not be generalizable given that there were different types of data 
included in each source.
CONCLUSION: Artificial intelligence allows for the processing and analysis of 
large amounts of data and can be applied to various disease states. The 
automation and machine learning models can optimize pharmacovigilance processes 
and provide a more efficient way to analyze information relevant to safety, 
although more research is needed to identify if this optimization has an impact 
on the quality of safety analyses. It is expected that its use will increase in 
the near future, particularly with its role in the prediction of side effects 
and ADRs.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-022-00441-z
PMID: 35904529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Jul 6;17(7):e1009053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009053. 
eCollection 2021 Jul.

Machine learning liver-injuring drug interactions with non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) from a retrospective electronic health record 
(EHR) cohort.

Datta A(1), Flynn NR(2), Barnette DA(3), Woeltje KF(4)(5), Miller GP(3), 
Swamidass SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in 
Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States of America.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(5)Center for Clinical Excellence at BJC HealthCare, Saint Louis, Missouri, 
United States of America.

Drug-drug interactions account for up to 30% of adverse drug reactions. 
Increasing prevalence of electronic health records (EHRs) offers a unique 
opportunity to build machine learning algorithms to identify drug-drug 
interactions that drive adverse events. In this study, we investigated 
hospitalizations' data to study drug interactions with non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) that result in drug-induced liver injury 
(DILI). We propose a logistic regression based machine learning algorithm that 
unearths several known interactions from an EHR dataset of about 400,000 
hospitalization. Our proposed modeling framework is successful in detecting 
87.5% of the positive controls, which are defined by drugs known to interact 
with diclofenac causing an increased risk of DILI, and correctly ranks aggregate 
risk of DILI for eight commonly prescribed NSAIDs. We found that our modeling 
framework is particularly successful in inferring associations of drug-drug 
interactions from relatively small EHR datasets. Furthermore, we have identified 
a novel and potentially hepatotoxic interaction that might occur during 
concomitant use of meloxicam and esomeprazole, which are commonly prescribed 
together to allay NSAID-induced gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. Empirically, we 
validate our approach against prior methods for signal detection on EHR 
datasets, in which our proposed approach outperforms all the compared methods 
across most metrics, such as area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve (AUROC) and area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009053
PMCID: PMC8284671
PMID: 34228716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


173. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):535-548. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01153-8. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Validation of Artificial Intelligence to Support the Automatic Coding of Patient 
Adverse Drug Reaction Reports, Using Nationwide Pharmacovigilance Data.

Martin GL(1)(2), Jouganous J(1), Savidan R(1), Bellec A(1), Goehrs C(1), 
Benkebil M(3), Miremont G(4)(5), Micallef J(6)(7), Salvo F(4)(5), Pariente 
A(4)(5), Létinier L(8)(9)(10); French Network of Pharmacovigilance Centres.

Author information:
(1)Synapse Medicine, 3 rue Lafayette, 33000, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Département de Santé Publique, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre 
Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, 
Paris, France.
(3)Surveillance Division, Agence Nationale de Sécurité du Médicament et des 
Produits de Santé (ANSM), Saint Denis, France.
(4)University of Bordeaux, INSERM, BPH, U1219, Team Pharmacoepidemiology, 
Bordeaux, France.
(5)CHU de Bordeaux, Pôle de Santé Publique, Service de Pharmacologie Médicale, 
Centre de Pharmacovigilance de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(6)CRPV Marseille Provence Corse, Service Hospitalo-Universitaire de 
Pharmacologie Clinique et Pharmacovigilance, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Marseille, Marseille, France.
(7)Aix Marseille Université, Institut des Neurosciences des Systèmes, INSERM 
1106, Marseille, France.
(8)Synapse Medicine, 3 rue Lafayette, 33000, Bordeaux, France. 
louis@synapse-medicine.com.
(9)University of Bordeaux, INSERM, BPH, U1219, Team Pharmacoepidemiology, 
Bordeaux, France. louis@synapse-medicine.com.
(10)CHU de Bordeaux, Pôle de Santé Publique, Service de Pharmacologie Médicale, 
Centre de Pharmacovigilance de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. 
louis@synapse-medicine.com.

INTRODUCTION: Adverse drug reaction reports are usually manually assessed by 
pharmacovigilance experts to detect safety signals associated with drugs. With 
the recent extension of reporting to patients and the emergence of mass 
media-related sanitary crises, adverse drug reaction reports currently 
frequently overwhelm pharmacovigilance networks. Artificial intelligence could 
help support the work of pharmacovigilance experts during such crises, by 
automatically coding reports, allowing them to prioritise or accelerate their 
manual assessment. After a previous study showing first results, we developed 
and compared state-of-the-art machine learning models using a larger nationwide 
dataset, aiming to automatically pre-code patients' adverse drug reaction 
reports.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to determine the best artificial intelligence model 
identifying adverse drug reactions and assessing seriousness in patients reports 
from the French national pharmacovigilance web portal.
METHODS: Reports coded by 27 Pharmacovigilance Centres between March 2017 and 
December 2020 were selected (n = 11,633). For each report, the Portable Document 
Format form containing free-text information filled by the patient, and the 
corresponding encodings of adverse event symptoms (in Medical Dictionary for 
Regulatory Activities Preferred Terms) and seriousness were obtained. This 
encoding by experts was used as the reference to train and evaluate models, 
which contained input data processing and machine-learning natural language 
processing to learn and predict encodings. We developed and compared different 
approaches for data processing and classifiers. Performance was evaluated using 
receiver operating characteristic area under the curve (AUC), F-measure, 
sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value. We used data from 26 
Pharmacovigilance Centres for training and internal validation. External 
validation was performed using data from the remaining Pharmacovigilance Centres 
during the same period.
RESULTS: Internal validation: for adverse drug reaction identification, Term 
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) + Light Gradient Boosted Machine 
(LGBM) achieved an AUC of 0.97 and an F-measure of 0.80. The Cross-lingual 
Language Model (XLM) [transformer] obtained an AUC of 0.97 and an F-measure of 
0.78. For seriousness assessment, FastText + LGBM achieved an AUC of 0.85 and an 
F-measure of 0.63. CamemBERT (transformer) + Light Gradient Boosted Machine 
obtained an AUC of 0.84 and an F-measure of 0.63. External validation for both 
adverse drug reaction identification and seriousness assessment tasks yielded 
consistent and robust results.
CONCLUSIONS: Our artificial intelligence models showed promising performance to 
automatically code patient adverse drug reaction reports, with very similar 
results across approaches. Our system has been deployed by national health 
authorities in France since January 2021 to facilitate pharmacovigilance of 
COVID-19 vaccines. Further studies will be needed to validate the performance of 
the tool in real-life settings.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01153-8
PMCID: PMC9112264
PMID: 35579816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Guillaume Louis Martin, Julien Jouganous, Axel 
Bellec, Romain Savidan, Clément Goehrs and Louis Létinier were employed by 
Synapse Medicine at the time this research was conducted or hold stock/stock 
options therein. All other authors declared no competing interests.


174. Drug Saf. 2022 Aug;45(8):853-862. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01196-x. Epub 2022 Jul 
6.

Combining Machine Learning with a Rule-Based Algorithm to Detect and Identify 
Related Entities of Documented Adverse Drug Reactions on Hospital Discharge 
Summaries.

Tan HX(1), Teo CHD(1), Ang PS(1), Loke WPC(1), Tham MY(1), Tan SH(1), Soh 
BLS(1), Foo PQB(1), Ling ZJ(2), Yip WLJ(3)(4), Tang Y(5), Yang J(5), Tung 
KHA(5), Dorajoo SR(6).

Author information:
(1)Vigilance and Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Regional Health System Office, National University of Singapore, National 
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Cardiology, National University Heart Centre, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Academic Informatics Office, National University Health System, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(5)Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Vigilance and Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore, Singapore. sreemanee_dorajoo@hsa.gov.sg.

INTRODUCTION: Discharge summaries contain valuable information about adverse 
drug reactions, but their unstructured nature makes them challenging to analyse 
and use as a signal source for pharmacovigilance. Machine learning has shown 
promise in identifying discharge summaries that contain related drug-adverse 
event pairs but has fared relatively poorer in entity extraction.
METHODS: A hybrid model is developed combining rule-based and machine learning 
algorithms using discharge summaries with the aim of maximising capture of 
related drug-adverse event pairs. The rule first identifies segments containing 
adverse event entities within a 100-character distance from a drug term; machine 
learning subsequently estimates the relatedness of the drug and adverse event 
entities contained. The approach is validated on four independent datasets that 
are temporally and geographically separated from model development data. The 
impact of restricted drug-adverse event pair detection on recall is evaluated by 
using two of the four validation datasets that do not impose rule-based 
restrictions to annotations.
RESULTS: The hybrid model achieves a recall of 0.80 (fivefold cross validation), 
0.80 (temporal) and 0.76 (geographical) on validation using datasets containing 
only pre-identified target text segments that fulfil the rule-based algorithm 
criteria. When tested on datasets that additionally contained drug-adverse event 
pairs not restricted by the rule-based criteria, recall of the model declines to 
0.68 and 0.62 on temporally and geographically separated datasets, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed hybrid model demonstrates reasonable generalisability 
on external validation. Rule-based restriction of the detection space results in 
an approximately 12-14% reduction in recall but improves identification of the 
related drug and adverse event terms.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01196-x
PMID: 35794349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):571-582. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01163-6. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Leveraging Machine Learning to Facilitate Individual Case Causality Assessment 
of Adverse Drug Reactions.

Cherkas Y(1), Ide J(2), van Stekelenborg J(3).

Author information:
(1)Janssen R&D, Horsham, PA, USA. ycherka@its.jnj.com.
(2)Johnson & Johnson Consumer, Inc, Skillman, NJ, USA.
(3)Janssen R&D, Horsham, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Causality assessment of individual case safety reports (ICSRs) is 
an important step in pharmacovigilance case-level review and aims to establish a 
position on whether a patient's exposure to a drug is causally related to the 
patient experiencing an untoward adverse event. There are many different 
approaches for case causality adjudication, including the use of expert opinions 
and algorithmic frameworks; however, a great deal of variability exists between 
assessment methods, products, therapeutic classes, individual physicians, change 
of process and conventions over time, and other factors.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to develop a machine learning-based 
model that can predict the likelihood of a causal association of an observed 
drug-reaction combination in an ICSR.
METHODS: In this study, we used a set of annotated solicited ICSRs (50K cases) 
from a company post-marketing database. These data were enriched with novel 
supplementary features from external and internal data sources that aim to 
capture facets such as temporal plausibility, scientific validity, and 
confoundedness that have been shown to contribute to causality adjudication. 
Using these features, we constructed a Bayesian network (BN) model to predict 
drug-event pair causality assessment. BN topology was driven by an internally 
developed ICSR causality decision support tool. Performance of the model was 
evaluated through examination of sensitivity, positive predictive value (PPV), 
and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) on an 
independent set of data from a temporally adjacent interval (20K cases). No 
external validation was performed because of a lack of publicly available ICSRs 
with causality assessments for drug-event pairs.
RESULTS: The model demonstrated high performance in predicting the causality 
assessment of drug-event pairs compared with clinical judgment using global 
introspection (AUC 0.924; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.922-0.927). The 
sensitivity of the model was 0.900 (95% CI 0.896-0.904), and the PPV of the 
model was 0.778 (95% CI 0.773-0.783).
CONCLUSION: These results show that robust probabilistic modeling of ICSR 
causality is feasible, and the approach used in the development of the model can 
serve as a framework for such causality assessments, leading to improvements in 
safety decision making.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01163-6
PMID: 35579819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biomed Inform. 2020 Oct;110:103539. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103539. Epub 2020 
Aug 17.

Comparing deep learning architectures for sentiment analysis on drug reviews.

Colón-Ruiz C(1), Segura-Bedmar I(2).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, University Carlos III of Madrid, Avenida de la 
Universidad 30, 28911, Leganés, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
ccolon@inf.uc3m.es.
(2)Computer Science Department, University Carlos III of Madrid, Avenida de la 
Universidad 30, 28911, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.

Since the turn of the century, as millions of user's opinions are available on 
the web, sentiment analysis has become one of the most fruitful research fields 
in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Research on sentiment analysis has covered 
a wide range of domains such as economy, polity, and medicine, among others. In 
the pharmaceutical field, automatic analysis of online user reviews allows for 
the analysis of large amounts of user's opinions and to obtain relevant 
information about the effectiveness and side effects of drugs, which could be 
used to improve pharmacovigilance systems. Throughout the years, approaches for 
sentiment analysis have progressed from simple rules to advanced machine 
learning techniques such as deep learning, which has become an emerging 
technology in many NLP tasks. Sentiment analysis is not oblivious to this 
success, and several systems based on deep learning have recently demonstrated 
their superiority over former methods, achieving state-of-the-art results on 
standard sentiment analysis datasets. However, prior work shows that very few 
attempts have been made to apply deep learning to sentiment analysis of drug 
reviews. We present a benchmark comparison of various deep learning 
architectures such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Long short-term 
memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks. We propose several combinations of 
these models and also study the effect of different pre-trained word embedding 
models. As transformers have revolutionized the NLP field achieving state-of-art 
results for many NLP tasks, we also explore Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers (BERT) with a Bi-LSTM for the sentiment 
analysis of drug reviews. Our experiments show that the usage of BERT obtains 
the best results, but with a very high training time. On the other hand, CNN 
achieves acceptable results while requiring less training time.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103539
PMID: 32818665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2020 Jul;53(4):179-183. doi: 10.1055/a-0914-3234. Epub 2019 
Jun 11.

Roadmap for Routine Pharmacogenetic Testing in a Psychiatric University 
Hospital.

Menke A(1), Weber H(1), Deckert J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Center of Mental 
Health, University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) implicates a huge burden for patients and 
society. Although currently available antidepressants are effective treatment 
options, more than 50% of the patients do not respond to the first administered 
antidepressant. In addition, in more than 25% with antidepressants-treated 
patients, adverse effects occur. Currently, the selection of treatment does not 
reflect objectively measurable data from neurobiological and behavioral systems. 
However, in the last decades, the understanding of the impact of genetic 
variants on clinical features such as drug metabolism has grown and can be used 
to develop tests that enable a patient-tailored individual treatment. In fact, 
robust evidence was found that genetic variants of CYP450 enzymes such as CYP2D6 
and CYP2C19 can be surrogate markers for the metabolism of certain drugs. This 
article describes a pilot study design aimed to combine clinical variables such 
as therapeutic drug monitoring, inflammatory and stress markers with static and 
variable genetic information of depressed patients to develop an algorithm that 
predicts treatment response, and tolerability using machine learning algorithms. 
Psychometric evaluation covers the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, the 
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire, and adverse drug reactions. An in-depth 
(epi-)genetic assessment combines genome-wide gene association data with DNA 
methylation patterns of genes coding CYP enzymes along with a pharmacogenetic 
battery focusing on CYP enzymes. Using these measures to stratify depressed 
patients, this approach should contribute to a data-driven assessment and 
management of MDD, which can be referred to as precision medicine or 
high-definition medicine.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0914-3234
PMID: 31185510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.


178. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021 Jul 14;28(7):1393-1400. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocab014.

Extracting postmarketing adverse events from safety reports in the vaccine 
adverse event reporting system (VAERS) using deep learning.

Du J(1), Xiang Y(1), Sankaranarayanapillai M(1), Zhang M(1), Wang J(1), Si Y(1), 
Pham HA(1), Xu H(1), Chen Y(2), Tao C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Automated analysis of vaccine postmarketing surveillance narrative 
reports is important to understand the progression of rare but severe vaccine 
adverse events (AEs). This study implemented and evaluated state-of-the-art deep 
learning algorithms for named entity recognition to extract nervous system 
disorder-related events from vaccine safety reports.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We collected Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) related 
influenza vaccine safety reports from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System 
(VAERS) from 1990 to 2016. VAERS reports were selected and manually annotated 
with major entities related to nervous system disorders, including, 
investigation, nervous_AE, other_AE, procedure, social_circumstance, and 
temporal_expression. A variety of conventional machine learning and deep 
learning algorithms were then evaluated for the extraction of the above 
entities. We further pretrained domain-specific BERT (Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers) using VAERS reports (VAERS BERT) and compared 
its performance with existing models.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Ninety-one VAERS reports were annotated, resulting in 
2512 entities. The corpus was made publicly available to promote community 
efforts on vaccine AEs identification. Deep learning-based methods (eg, bi-long 
short-term memory and BERT models) outperformed conventional machine 
learning-based methods (ie, conditional random fields with extensive features). 
The BioBERT large model achieved the highest exact match F-1 scores on 
nervous_AE, procedure, social_circumstance, and temporal_expression; while VAERS 
BERT large models achieved the highest exact match F-1 scores on investigation 
and other_AE. An ensemble of these 2 models achieved the highest exact match 
microaveraged F-1 score at 0.6802 and the second highest lenient match 
microaveraged F-1 score at 0.8078 among peer models.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocab014
PMCID: PMC8279785
PMID: 33647938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 21;13(11):e0207749. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207749. 
eCollection 2018.

Machine learning model combining features from algorithms with different 
analytical methodologies to detect laboratory-event-related adverse drug 
reaction signals.

Jeong E(1), Park N(1)(2), Choi Y(1)(3), Park RW(1)(3), Yoon D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Apr 9;14(4):e0215344.

BACKGROUND: The importance of identifying and evaluating adverse drug reactions 
(ADRs) has been widely recognized. Many studies have developed algorithms for 
ADR signal detection using electronic health record (EHR) data. In this study, 
we propose a machine learning (ML) model that enables accurate ADR signal 
detection by integrating features from existing algorithms based on inpatient 
EHR laboratory results.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To construct an ADR reference dataset, we extracted known 
drug-laboratory event pairs represented by a laboratory test from the EU-SPC and 
SIDER databases. All possible drug-laboratory event pairs, except known ones, 
are considered unknown. To detect a known drug-laboratory event pair, three 
existing algorithms-CERT, CLEAR, and PACE-were applied to 21-year inpatient EHR 
data. We also constructed ML models (based on random forest, L1 regularized 
logistic regression, support vector machine, and a neural network) that use the 
intermediate products of the CERT, CLEAR, and PACE algorithms as inputs and 
determine whether a drug-laboratory event pair is associated. For performance 
comparison, we evaluated the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value 
(PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), F1-measure, and area under receiver 
operating characteristic (AUROC).
RESULTS: All measures of ML models outperformed those of existing algorithms 
with sensitivity of 0.593-0.793, specificity of 0.619-0.796, NPV of 0.645-0.727, 
PPV of 0.680-0.777, F1-measure of 0.629-0.709, and AUROC of 0.737-0.816. 
Features related to change or distribution of shape were considered important 
for detecting ADR signals.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved performance of ML models indicated that applying our model 
to EHR data is feasible and promising for detecting more accurate and 
comprehensive ADR signals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207749
PMCID: PMC6248973
PMID: 30462745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


180. Database (Oxford). 2017 Jan 1;2017:bax019. doi: 10.1093/database/bax019.

Exploring convolutional neural networks for drug-drug interaction extraction.

Suárez-Paniagua V(1), Segura-Bedmar I(1), Martínez P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University Carlos III of Madrid Leganés 
28911, Madrid, Spain.

Drug-drug interaction (DDI), which is a specific type of adverse drug reaction, 
occurs when a drug influences the level or activity of another drug. Natural 
language processing techniques can provide health-care professionals with a 
novel way of reducing the time spent reviewing the literature for potential 
DDIs. The current state-of-the-art for the extraction of DDIs is based on 
feature-engineering algorithms (such as support vector machines), which usually 
require considerable time and effort. One possible alternative to these 
approaches includes deep learning. This technique aims to automatically learn 
the best feature representation from the input data for a given task. The 
purpose of this paper is to examine whether a convolutional neural network 
(CNN), which only uses word embeddings as input features, can be applied 
successfully to classify DDIs from biomedical texts. Proposed herein, is a CNN 
architecture with only one hidden layer, thus making the model more 
computationally efficient, and we perform detailed experiments in order to 
determine the best settings of the model. The goal is to determine the best 
parameter of this basic CNN that should be considered for future research. The 
experimental results show that the proposed approach is promising because it 
attained the second position in the 2013 rankings of the DDI extraction 
challenge. However, it obtained worse results than previous works using neural 
networks with more complex architectures.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bax019
PMCID: PMC5467573
PMID: 28605776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Sep Sci. 2021 Jan;44(1):373-386. doi: 10.1002/jssc.202000831. Epub 2020 Oct 
15.

Metabolic stability studies of lead compounds supported by separation techniques 
and chemometrics analysis.

Ulenberg S(1), Bączek T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, 
Poland.

With metabolism being one of the main routes of drug elimination from the body 
(accounting for removal of around 75% of known drugs), it is crucial to 
understand and study metabolic stability of drug candidates. Metabolically 
unstable compounds are uncomfortable to administer (requiring repetitive dosage 
during therapy), while overly stable drugs increase risk of adverse drug 
reactions. Additionally, biotransformation reactions can lead to formation of 
toxic or pharmacologically active metabolites (either less-active than parent 
drug, or even with different action). There were numerous approaches in 
estimating metabolic stability, including in vitro, in vivo, in silico, and 
high-throughput screening to name a few. This review aims at describing 
separation techniques used in in vitro metabolic stability estimation, as well 
as chemometric techniques allowing for creation of predictive models which 
enable high-throughput screening approach for estimation of metabolic stability. 
With a very low rate of drug approval, it is important to understand in silico 
methods that aim at supporting classical in vitro approach. Predictive models 
that allow assessment of certain biological properties of drug candidates allow 
for cutting not only cost, but also time required to synthesize compounds 
predicted to be unstable or inactive by in silico models.

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jssc.202000831
PMID: 33006800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2022 May;11(5):540-555. doi: 
10.1002/psp4.12765. Epub 2022 Feb 20.

Advancing drug safety science by integrating molecular knowledge with 
post-marketing adverse event reports.

Soldatos TG(1), Kim S(2), Schmidt S(2), Lesko LJ(2), Jackson DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Health GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Center for Pharmacometrics and Systems 
Pharmacology, University of Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.

Promising drug development efforts may frequently fail due to unintended adverse 
reactions. Several methods have been developed to analyze such data, aiming to 
improve pharmacovigilance and drug safety. In this work, we provide a brief 
review of key directions to quantitatively analyzing adverse events and explore 
the potential of augmenting these methods using additional molecular data 
descriptors. We argue that molecular expansion of adverse event data may provide 
a path to improving the insights gained through more traditional 
pharmacovigilance approaches. Examples include the ability to assess statistical 
relevance with respect to underlying biomolecular mechanisms, the ability to 
generate plausible causative hypotheses and/or confirmation where possible, the 
ability to computationally study potential clinical trial designs and/or 
results, as well as the further provision of advanced features incorporated in 
innovative methods, such as machine learning. In summary, molecular data 
expansion provides an elegant way to extend mechanistic modeling, systems 
pharmacology, and patient-centered approaches for the assessment of drug safety. 
We anticipate that such advances in real-world data informatics and outcome 
analytics will help to better inform public health, via the improved ability to 
prospectively understand and predict various types of drug-induced molecular 
perturbations and adverse events.

© 2022 The Authors. CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12765
PMCID: PMC9124355
PMID: 35143713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.B.J. and T.G.S. have patents associated with 
the analysis of adverse event data, are employees of Molecular Health GmbH, and 
holders of stock options in the same company.


183. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 May 20;291:3-16. doi: 10.3233/SHTI220003.

Towards the Application of Machine Learning in Emergency Informatics.

Rostam Niakan Kalhori S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Peter L. Reichertz Institute for Medical Informatics of TU Braunschweig and 
Hannover Medical School, Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Department of Health Information Management, School of Allied Medical 
Sciences, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Emergency care is one of the cornerstone parts of the world health 
organization's action plan. Rapid response and immediate care are considered in 
agile emergency care. Artificial intelligence (AI) and informatics have been 
applied to fulfill these requirements through automated emergency technology. 
Machine learning (ML) is one of the main parts of some of these proposed 
technologies. There are various ML algorithms and techniques which are 
potentially applicable for different purposes of emergency care. AI-based 
approaches using classification and clustering algorithms, natural language 
processing, and text mining are some of the possible techniques that could prove 
useful for investigating models of emergency prevention and management and 
proposing improved procedures for handling such critical situations. ML is known 
as a field of AI which attempts to automatically learn from data and applies 
that learning to make better decisions. Decision-support tools can apply the 
results of either supervised or various semi-supervised or unsupervised learning 
methods to tackle the how decisions about emergency situations are typically 
handled by the best professionals at the scene of an emergency, in the 
pre-hospital, and in healthcare facility settings. Enhanced and rapid 
communication at the moment of emergency, with the most effective decision 
making for triaging to estimate the acute nature of injuries and possible 
complications, how to keep a patient stable on the way to the care facility, and 
also avoiding adverse drug reactions, are some of the possible directions for 
exploring how ML can help to gather the data and to make emergency management 
more efficient and effective. The wide range of scenarios present in emergency 
situations and the complexity of different legal and ethical constraints on what 
responding personnel are allowed to perform on an injured subject before 
reaching a hospital makes for a most challenging set of problems for 
investigating the components of "intelligent" decision support that could help 
in these highly interactive and humanly tragic situations.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI220003
PMID: 35593754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Mar 7;7:11. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0052-6. eCollection 
2016.

Extracting drug-enzyme relation from literature as evidence for drug drug 
interaction.

Zhang Y(1), Wu HY(2), Du J(1), Xu J(1), Wang J(1), Tao C(1), Li L(2), Xu H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, TX USA.
(2)School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN USA.

Erratum in
    J Biomed Semantics. 2016;7:21.

BACKGROUND: Information about drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is crucial for 
computational applications such as pharmacovigilance and drug repurposing. 
However, existing sources of DDIs have the problems of low coverage, low 
accuracy and low agreement. One common type of DDIs is related to the mechanism 
of drug metabolism: a DDI relation may be caused by different interactions 
(e.g., substrate, inhibit) between drugs and enzymes in the drug metabolism 
process. Thus, information from drug enzyme interactions (DEIs) serves as 
important supportive evidence for DDIs. Further, potential DDIs present 
implicitly could be detected by inference and reasoning based on DEIs.
METHODS: In this article, we propose a hybrid approach to combining machine 
learning algorithm with trigger words and syntactic patterns, for DEI relation 
extraction from biomedical literature. The extracted DEI relations are used for 
reasoning to infer potential DDI relations, based on a defined drug-enzyme 
ontology incorporating biological knowledge.
RESULTS: Evaluation results demonstrate that the performance of DEI relation 
extraction is promising, with an F-measure of 84.97% on the in vivo dataset and 
65.58% on the in vitro dataset. Further, the inferred DDIs achieved a precision 
of 83.19% on the in vivo dataset and 70.94% on the in vitro dataset, 
respectively. A further examination showed that the overlaps between our 
inferred DDIs and those present in DrugBank were 42.02% on the in vivo dataset 
and 19.23 % on the in vitro dataset, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper proposed an effective approach to extract DEI relations 
from biomedical literature. Potential DDIs not present in existing knowledge 
bases were then inferred based on the extracted DEIs, demonstrating the 
capability of the proposed approach to detect DDIs with scientific evidence for 
pharmacovigilance and drug repurposing applications.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0052-6
PMCID: PMC4780188
PMID: 26955465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Eval Clin Pract. 2021 Jun;27(3):504-512. doi: 10.1111/jep.13542. Epub 2021 Feb 
11.

Artificial intelligence methods for a Bayesian epistemology-powered evidence 
evaluation.

De Pretis F(1)(2), Landes J(3), Peden W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, School of Medicine and 
Surgery, Marche Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(3)Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, Faculty of Philosophy, Philosophy 
of Science and Study of Religion, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 
Munich, Germany.
(4)Erasmus Institute for Philosophy and Economics, Erasmus School of Philosophy, 
Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Philosophy, Durham University, Durham, UK.

RATIONALE, AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: The diversity of types of evidence (eg, case 
reports, animal studies and observational studies) makes the assessment of a 
drug's safety profile into a formidable challenge. While frequentist uncertain 
inference struggles in aggregating these signals, the more flexible Bayesian 
approaches seem better suited for this quest. Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
offers great promise to these approaches for information retrieval, decision 
support, and learning probabilities from data.
METHODS: E-Synthesis is a Bayesian framework for drug safety assessments built 
on philosophical principles and considerations. It aims to aggregate all the 
available information, in order to provide a Bayesian probability of a drug 
causing an adverse reaction. AI systems are being developed for evidence 
aggregation in medicine, which increasingly are automated.
RESULTS: We find that AI can help E-Synthesis with information retrieval, 
usability (graphical decision-making aids), learning Bayes factors from 
historical data, assessing quality of information and determining conditional 
probabilities for the so-called 'indicators' of causation for E-Synthesis. Vice 
versa, E-Synthesis offers a solid methodological basis for (semi-)automated 
evidence aggregation with AI systems.
CONCLUSIONS: Properly applied, AI can help the transition of philosophical 
principles and considerations concerning evidence aggregation for drug safety to 
a tool that can be used in practice.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jep.13542
PMID: 33569874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Healthc Inform Res. 2020 Apr;26(2):104-111. doi: 10.4258/hir.2020.26.2.104. Epub 
2020 Apr 30.

Analysis of Adverse Drug Reactions Identified in Nursing Notes Using 
Reinforcement Learning.

Jeon E(1), Kim Y(2), Park H(3), Park RW(3)(4), Shin H(5), Park HA(6).

Author information:
(1)Technology Research, Samsung SDS, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Institute for Cognitive Science, College of Humanities, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(5)Department of Linguistics, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(6)College of Nursing, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Electronic Health Records (EHRs)-based surveillance systems are 
being actively developed for detecting adverse drug reactions (ADRs), but this 
is being hindered by the difficulty of extracting data from unstructured 
records. This study performed the analysis of ADRs from nursing notes for drug 
safety surveillance using the temporal difference method in reinforcement 
learning (TD learning).
METHODS: Nursing notes of 8,316 patients (4,158 ADR and 4,158 non-ADR cases) 
admitted to Ajou University Hospital were used for the ADR classification task. 
A TD(λ) model was used to estimate state values for indicating the ADR risk. For 
the TD learning, each nursing phrase was encoded into one of seven states, and 
the state values estimated during training were employed for the subsequent 
testing phase. We applied logistic regression to the state values from the TD(λ) 
model for the classification task.
RESULTS: The overall accuracy of TD-based logistic regression of 0.63 was 
comparable to that of two machine-learning methods (0.64 for a naïve Bayes 
classifier and 0.63 for a support vector machine), while it outperformed two 
deep learning-based methods (0.58 for a text convolutional neural network and 
0.61 for a long short-term memory neural network). Most importantly, it was 
found that the TD-based method can estimate state values according to the 
context of nursing phrases.
CONCLUSIONS: TD learning is a promising approach because it can exploit 
contextual, time-dependent aspects of the available data and provide an analysis 
of the severity of ADRs in a fully incremental manner.

© 2020 The Korean Society of Medical Informatics.

DOI: 10.4258/hir.2020.26.2.104
PMCID: PMC7278512
PMID: 32547807

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.


187. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Oct 31;9:1245. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01245. eCollection 
2018.

Determining the Balance Between Drug Efficacy and Safety by the Network and 
Biological System Profile of Its Therapeutic Target.

Li XX(1)(2), Yin J(1), Tang J(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Yang Q(1)(2), Xiao Z(1), Zhang 
R(1), Wang Y(1), Hong J(1), Tao L(3), Xue W(2), Zhu F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Brain Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Elemene Class Anti-cancer Chinese Medicine of Zhejiang 
Province, School of Medicine, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China.

One of the most challenging puzzles in drug discovery is the identification and 
characterization of candidate drug of well-balanced profile between efficacy and 
safety. So far, extensive efforts have been made to evaluate this balance by 
estimating the quantitative structure-therapeutic relationship and exploring 
target profile of adverse drug reaction. Particularly, the therapeutic index 
(TI) has emerged as a key indicator illustrating this delicate balance, and a 
clinically successful agent requires a sufficient TI suitable for it 
corresponding indication. However, the TI information are largely unknown for 
most drugs, and the mechanism underlying the drugs with narrow TI (NTI drugs) is 
still elusive. In this study, the collective effects of human protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network and biological system profile on the drugs' 
efficacy-safety balance were systematically evaluated. First, a comprehensive 
literature review of the FDA approved drugs confirmed their NTI status. Second, 
a popular feature selection algorithm based on artificial intelligence (AI) was 
adopted to identify key factors differencing the target mechanism between NTI 
and non-NTI drugs. Finally, this work revealed that the targets of NTI drugs 
were highly centralized and connected in human PPI network, and the number of 
similarity proteins and affiliated signaling pathways of the corresponding 
targets was much higher than those of non-NTI drugs. These findings together 
with the newly discovered features or feature groups clarified the key factors 
indicating drug's narrow TI, and could thus provide a novel direction for 
determining the delicate drug efficacy-safety balance.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01245
PMCID: PMC6220079
PMID: 30429792


188. J Chem Inf Model. 2018 May 29;58(5):943-956. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00641. Epub 
2018 May 10.

In Silico Pharmacoepidemiologic Evaluation of Drug-Induced Cardiovascular 
Complications Using Combined Classifiers.

Cai C(1), Fang J(1), Guo P(1), Wang Q(1), Hong H(2), Moslehi J(3)(4), Cheng 
F(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology , Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine 
, Guangzhou 510405 , China.
(2)Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, National Center for 
Toxicological Research , FDA , Jefferson , Arkansas 72079 , United States.
(3)Division of Cardiology , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , Tennessee 37232 
, United States.
(4)Cardio-Oncology Program, Department of Medicine , Vanderbilt University , 
Nashville , Tennessee 37232 , United States.
(5)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of Cancer Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 
02215 , United States.
(6)Center for Complex Networks Research , Northeastern University , Boston , 
Massachusetts 02115 , United States.

Drug-induced cardiovascular complications are the most common adverse drug 
events and account for the withdrawal or severe restrictions on the use of 
multitudinous postmarketed drugs. In this study, we developed new in silico 
models for systematic identification of drug-induced cardiovascular 
complications in drug discovery and postmarketing surveillance. Specifically, we 
collected drug-induced cardiovascular complications covering the five most 
common types of cardiovascular outcomes (hypertension, heart block, arrhythmia, 
cardiac failure, and myocardial infarction) from four publicly available data 
resources: Comparative Toxicogenomics Database, SIDER, Offsides, and MetaADEDB. 
Using these databases, we developed a combined classifier framework through 
integration of five machine-learning algorithms: logistic regression, random 
forest, k-nearest neighbors, support vector machine, and neural network. The 
totality of models included 180 single classifiers with area under receiver 
operating characteristic curves (AUC) ranging from 0.647 to 0.809 on 5-fold 
cross-validations. To develop the combined classifiers, we then utilized a 
neural network algorithm to integrate the best four single classifiers for each 
cardiovascular outcome. The combined classifiers had higher performance with an 
AUC range from 0.784 to 0.842 compared to single classifiers. Furthermore, we 
validated our predicted cardiovascular complications for 63 anticancer agents 
using experimental data from clinical studies, human pluripotent stem 
cell-derived cardiomyocyte assays, and literature. The success rate of our 
combined classifiers reached 87%. In conclusion, this study presents powerful in 
silico tools for systematic risk assessment of drug-induced cardiovascular 
complications. This tool is relevant not only in early stages of drug discovery 
but also throughout the life of a drug including clinical trials and 
postmarketing surveillance.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00641
PMCID: PMC5975252
PMID: 29712429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests All authors do not have any 
conflicts of interest.


189. JMIR Med Inform. 2014 Jun 27;2(1):e10. doi: 10.2196/medinform.3022.

Automatically Recognizing Medication and Adverse Event Information From Food and 
Drug Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System Narratives.

Polepalli Ramesh B(1), Belknap SM, Li Z, Frid N, West DP, Yu H.

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.

BACKGROUND: The Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting 
System (FAERS) is a repository of spontaneously-reported adverse drug events 
(ADEs) for FDA-approved prescription drugs. FAERS reports include both 
structured reports and unstructured narratives. The narratives often include 
essential information for evaluation of the severity, causality, and description 
of ADEs that are not present in the structured data. The timely identification 
of unknown toxicities of prescription drugs is an important, unsolved problem.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to develop an annotated corpus of 
FAERS narratives and biomedical named entity tagger to automatically identify 
ADE related information in the FAERS narratives.
METHODS: We developed an annotation guideline and annotate medication 
information and adverse event related entities on 122 FAERS narratives 
comprising approximately 23,000 word tokens. A named entity tagger using 
supervised machine learning approaches was built for detecting medication 
information and adverse event entities using various categories of features.
RESULTS: The annotated corpus had an agreement of over .9 Cohen's kappa for 
medication and adverse event entities. The best performing tagger achieves an 
overall performance of 0.73 F1 score for detection of medication, adverse event 
and other named entities.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we developed an annotated corpus of FAERS narratives 
and machine learning based models for automatically extracting medication and 
adverse event information from the FAERS narratives. Our study is an important 
step towards enriching the FAERS data for postmarketing pharmacovigilance.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.3022
PMCID: PMC4288072
PMID: 25600332

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


190. J Biomed Semantics. 2020 Jul 8;11(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s13326-020-00221-1.

Neural side effect discovery from user credibility and experience-assessed 
online health discussions.

Nguyen VH(1), Sugiyama K(2), Kan MY(2), Halder K(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, National University of Singapore, 13 Computing Drive, 
Singapore, 117417, Singapore. vhnguyen@u.nus.edu.
(2)School of Computing, National University of Singapore, 13 Computing Drive, 
Singapore, 117417, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Health 2.0 allows patients and caregivers to conveniently seek 
medical information and advice via e-portals and online discussion forums, 
especially regarding potential drug side effects. Although online health 
communities are helpful platforms for obtaining non-professional opinions, they 
pose risks in communicating unreliable and insufficient information in terms of 
quality and quantity. Existing methods in extracting user-reported adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs) in online health forums are not only insufficiently accurate as 
they disregard user credibility and drug experience, but are also expensive as 
they rely on supervised ground truth annotation of individual statement. We 
propose a NEural ArchiTecture for Drug side effect prediction (NEAT), which is 
optimized on the task of drug side effect discovery based on a complete 
discussion while being attentive to user credibility and experience, thus, 
addressing the mentioned shortcomings. We train our neural model in a 
self-supervised fashion using ground truth drug side effects from 
mayoclinic.org. NEAT learns to assign each user a score that is descriptive of 
their credibility and highlights the critical textual segments of their post.
RESULTS: Experiments show that NEAT improves drug side effect discovery from 
online health discussion by 3.04% from user-credibility agnostic baselines, and 
by 9.94% from non-neural baselines in term of F1. Additionally, the latent 
credibility scores learned by the model correlate well with trustworthiness 
signals, such as the number of "thanks" received by other forum members, and 
improve credibility heuristics such as number of posts by 0.113 in term of 
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Experience-based self-supervised 
attention highlights critical phrases such as mentioned side effects, and 
enhances fully supervised ADR extraction models based on sequence labelling by 
5.502% in terms of precision.
CONCLUSIONS: NEAT considers both user credibility and experience in online 
health forums, making feasible a self-supervised approach to side effect 
prediction for mentioned drugs. The derived user credibility and attention 
mechanism are transferable and improve downstream ADR extraction models. Our 
approach enhances automatic drug side effect discovery and fosters research in 
several domains including pharmacovigilance and clinical studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-020-00221-1
PMCID: PMC7341623
PMID: 32641159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


191. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jan 14;11:602365. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.602365. 
eCollection 2020.

Machine Learning for Detection of Safety Signals From Spontaneous Reporting 
System Data: Example of Nivolumab and Docetaxel.

Bae JH(1), Baek YH(1), Lee JE(1), Song I(2), Lee JH(3), Shin JY(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon-si, South Korea.
(2)Department of Health Administration, College of Nursing and Health, Kongju 
National University, Gongju-si, South Korea.
(3)Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon-si, 
South Korea.
(4)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Jongno-gu, South Korea.

Introduction: Various methods have been implemented to detect adverse drug 
reaction (ADR) signals. However, the applicability of machine learning methods 
has not yet been fully evaluated. Objective: To evaluate the feasibility of 
machine learning algorithms in detecting ADR signals of nivolumab and docetaxel, 
new and old anticancer agents. Methods: We conducted a safety surveillance study 
of nivolumab and docetaxel using the Korea national spontaneous reporting 
database from 2009 to 2018. We constructed a novel input dataset for each study 
drug comprised of known ADRs that were listed in the drug labels and unknown 
ADRs. Given the known ADRs, we trained machine learning algorithms and evaluated 
predictive performance in generating safety signals of machine learning 
algorithms (gradient boosting machine [GBM] and random forest [RF]) compared 
with traditional disproportionality analysis methods (reporting odds ratio [ROR] 
and information component [IC]) by using the area under the curve (AUC). Each 
method then was implemented to detect new safety signals from the unknown ADR 
datasets. Results: Of all methods implemented, GBM achieved the best average 
predictive performance (AUC: 0.97 and 0.93 for nivolumab and docetaxel). The AUC 
achieved by each method was 0.95 and 0.92 (RF), 0.55 and 0.51 (ROR), and 0.49 
and 0.48 (IC) for respective drug. GBM detected additional 24 and nine signals 
for nivolumab and 82 and 76 for docetaxel compared to ROR and IC, respectively, 
from the unknown ADR datasets. Conclusion: Machine learning algorithm based on 
GBM performed better and detected more new ADR signals than traditional 
disproportionality analysis methods.

Copyright © 2021 Bae, Baek, Lee, Song, Lee and Shin.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.602365
PMCID: PMC7898680
PMID: 33628176

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


192. J Infect Dis. 2016 Dec 1;214(suppl_4):S399-S403. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw281.

Digital Pharmacovigilance and Disease Surveillance: Combining Traditional and 
Big-Data Systems for Better Public Health.

Salathé M(1).

Author information:
(1)Digital Epidemiology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences and School of 
Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Geneva, Switzerland.

The digital revolution has contributed to very large data sets (ie, big data) 
relevant for public health. The two major data sources are electronic health 
records from traditional health systems and patient-generated data. As the two 
data sources have complementary strengths-high veracity in the data from 
traditional sources and high velocity and variety in patient-generated data-they 
can be combined to build more-robust public health systems. However, they also 
have unique challenges. Patient-generated data in particular are often 
completely unstructured and highly context dependent, posing essentially a 
machine-learning challenge. Some recent examples from infectious disease 
surveillance and adverse drug event monitoring demonstrate that the technical 
challenges can be solved. Despite these advances, the problem of verification 
remains, and unless traditional and digital epidemiologic approaches are 
combined, these data sources will be constrained by their intrinsic limits.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw281
PMCID: PMC5144898
PMID: 28830106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Ther. 2018 May;40(5):790-797. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.02.013. Epub 
2018 Mar 28.

Pharmacovigilance in Crisis: Drug Safety at a Crossroads.

Price J(1).

Author information:
(1)Consulting physician in pharmacovigilance, Madison, Connecticut. Electronic 
address: drjsprice@gmail.com.

Pharmacovigilance (PV) is under unprecedented stress from fundamental changes in 
a booming pharmaceutical industry, from the challenges of creating and 
maintaining an increasingly complex PV system in a globally diverse regulatory 
environment, and from unpredicted consequences of historical PV cost-reduction 
strategies. At the same time, talent availability lags demand, and many PV 
professionals may no longer be finding personal fulfillment in their careers. 
The situation creates risks for companies. Advantages and disadvantages of 
potential strategies to address this increasing problem at a corporate and 
industry level and in collaboration with regulatory agencies are discussed, as 
well as opportunities to adopt new technologies, including artificial 
intelligence and machine-learning to automate pharmacovigilance operations. 
These approaches would address burdensome and wasteful effort assuring 
regulatory compliance and free up resources to support the original mission of 
PV as an important public health activity and to reinvest in the development of 
new drugs.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.02.013
PMID: 29605513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Dec 1;26(12):1560-1565. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz135.

Reducing drug prescription errors and adverse drug events by application of a 
probabilistic, machine-learning based clinical decision support system in an 
inpatient setting.

Segal G(1), Segev A(1), Brom A(1), Lifshitz Y(1), Wasserstrum Y(1), Zimlichman 
E(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine "T," Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Management Wing, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Drug prescription errors are made, worldwide, on a daily basis, 
resulting in a high burden of morbidity and mortality. Existing rule-based 
systems for prevention of such errors are unsuccessful and associated with 
substantial burden of false alerts.
OBJECTIVE: In this prospective study, we evaluated the accuracy, validity, and 
clinical usefulness of medication error alerts generated by a novel system using 
outlier detection screening algorithms, used on top of a legacy standard system, 
in a real-life inpatient setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We integrated a novel outlier system into an existing 
electronic medical record system, in a single medical ward in a tertiary medical 
center. The system monitored all drug prescriptions written during 16 months. 
The department's staff assessed all alerts for accuracy, clinical validity, and 
usefulness. We recorded all physician's real-time responses to alerts generated.
RESULTS: The alert burden generated by the system was low, with alerts generated 
for 0.4% of all medication orders. Sixty percent of the alerts were flagged 
after the medication was already dispensed following changes in patients' status 
which necessitated medication changes (eg, changes in vital signs). Eighty-five 
percent of the alerts were confirmed clinically valid, and 80% were considered 
clinically useful. Forty-three percent of the alerts caused changes in 
subsequent medical orders.
CONCLUSION: A clinical decision support system that used a probabilistic, 
machine-learning approach based on statistically derived outliers to detect 
medication errors generated clinically useful alerts. The system had high 
accuracy, low alert burden and low false-positive rate, and led to changes in 
subsequent orders.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz135
PMCID: PMC7647149
PMID: 31390471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jun 29;13:896104. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.896104. 
eCollection 2022.

A Risk-Factor Model for Antineoplastic Drug-Induced Serious Adverse Events in 
Cancer Inpatients: A Retrospective Study Based on the Global Trigger Tool and 
Machine Learning.

Zhang N(1)(2), Pan LY(3), Chen WY(3), Ji HH(1), Peng GQ(3), Tang ZW(3), Wang 
HL(4), Jia YT(1)(2), Gong J(4).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Chongqing 
Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Department of Pharmacy, Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Chongqing University Cancer Hospital, Chongqing, 
China.
(4)Department of Information Center, The University Town Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

The objective of this study was to apply a machine learning method to evaluate 
the risk factors associated with serious adverse events (SAEs) and predict the 
occurrence of SAEs in cancer inpatients using antineoplastic drugs. A 
retrospective review of the medical records of 499 patients diagnosed with 
cancer admitted between January 1 and December 31, 2017, was performed. First, 
the Global Trigger Tool (GTT) was used to actively monitor adverse drug events 
(ADEs) and SAEs caused by antineoplastic drugs and take the number of positive 
triggers as an intermediate variable. Subsequently, risk factors with 
statistical significance were selected by univariate analysis and least absolute 
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) analysis. Finally, using the risk 
factors after the LASSO analysis as covariates, a nomogram based on a logistic 
model, extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), categorical boosting (CatBoost), 
adaptive boosting (AdaBoost), light-gradient-boosting machine (LightGBM), random 
forest (RF), gradient-boosting decision tree (GBDT), decision tree (DT), and 
ensemble model based on seven algorithms were used to establish the prediction 
models. A series of indicators such as the area under the ROC curve (AUROC) and 
the area under the PR curve (AUPR) was used to evaluate the model performance. A 
total of 94 SAE patients were identified in our samples. Risk factors of SAEs 
were the number of triggers, length of stay, age, number of combined drugs, ADEs 
occurred in previous chemotherapy, and sex. In the test cohort, a nomogram based 
on the logistic model owns the AUROC of 0.799 and owns the AUPR of 0.527. The 
GBDT has the best predicting abilities (AUROC = 0.832 and AUPR = 0.557) among 
the eight machine learning models and was better than the nomogram and was 
chosen to establish the prediction webpage. This study provides a novel method 
to accurately predict SAE occurrence in cancer inpatients.

Copyright © 2022 Zhang, Pan, Chen, Ji, Peng, Tang, Wang, Jia and Gong.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.896104
PMCID: PMC9277092
PMID: 35847000

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


196. Artif Intell Med. 2020 Sep;109:101942. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2020.101942. Epub 
2020 Sep 15.

Exploiting complex medical data with interpretable deep learning for adverse 
drug event prediction.

Rebane J(1), Samsten I(2), Papapetrou P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: jonathan@dsv.su.se.
(2)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

A variety of deep learning architectures have been developed for the goal of 
predictive modelling and knowledge extraction from medical records. Several 
models have placed strong emphasis on temporal attention mechanisms and decay 
factors as a means to include highly temporally relevant information regarding 
the recency of medical event occurrence while facilitating medical code-level 
interpretability. In this study we utilise such models with a large Electronic 
Patient Record (EPR) data set consisting of diagnoses, medication, and clinical 
text data for the purpose of adverse drug event (ADE) prediction. The first 
contribution of this work is an empirical evaluation of two state-of-the-art 
medical-code based models in terms of objective performance metrics for ADE 
prediction on diagnosis and medication data. Secondly, as an extension of 
previous work, we augment an interpretable deep learning architecture to permit 
numerical risk and clinical text features and demonstrate how this approach 
yields improved predictive performance compared to the other baselines. Finally, 
we assess the importance of attention mechanisms in regards to their usefulness 
for medical code-level and text-level interpretability, which may facilitate 
novel insights pertaining to the nature of ADE occurrence within the health care 
domain.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2020.101942
PMID: 34756221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Pharmaceut Med. 2019 Apr;33(2):109-120. doi: 10.1007/s40290-019-00269-0.

Artificial Intelligence Within Pharmacovigilance: A Means to Identify Cognitive 
Services and the Framework for Their Validation.

Mockute R(1), Desai S(2), Perera S(3), Assuncao B(2), Danysz K(4), Tetarenko 
N(2), Gaddam D(2), Abatemarco D(2), Widdowson M(5), Beauchamp S(2), Cicirello 
S(4), Mingle E(2).

Author information:
(1)Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Avenue, Summit, NJ, 07901, USA. 
Rmockute@celgene.com.
(2)Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Avenue, Summit, NJ, 07901, USA.
(3)IBM Watson Health, Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA, USA.
(4)Celgene Corporation, Boudry, Switzerland.
(5)Celgene Corporation, Stockley Park, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Pharmacovigilance (PV) detects, assesses, and prevents adverse 
events (AEs) and other drug-related problems by collecting, evaluating, and 
acting upon AEs. The volume of individual case safety reports (ICSRs) increases 
yearly, but it is estimated that more than 90% of AEs go unreported. In this 
landscape, embracing assistive technologies at scale becomes necessary to obtain 
a higher yield of AEs, to maintain compliance, and transform the PV professional 
work life.
AIM: The aim of this study was to identify areas across the PV value chain that 
can be augmented by cognitive service solutions using the methodologies of 
contextual analysis and cognitive load theory. It will also provide a framework 
of how to validate these PV cognitive services leveraging the acceptable quality 
limit approach.
METHODS: The data used to train the cognitive service were an annotated corpus 
consisting of 20,000 ICSRS from which we developed a framework to identify and 
validate 40 cognitive services ranging from information extraction to complex 
decision making. This framework addresses the following shortcomings: (1) 
needing subject-matter expertise (SME) to match the artificial intelligence (AI) 
model predictions to the gold standard, commonly referred to as 'ground truth' 
in the AI space, (2) ground truth inconsistencies, (3) automated validation of 
prediction missing context, and (4) auto-labeling causing inaccurate test 
accuracy. The method consists of (1) conducting contextual analysis, (2) 
assessing human cognitive workload, (3) determining decision points for applying 
artificial intelligence (AI), (4) defining the scope of the data, or annotated 
corpus required for training and validation of the cognitive services, (5) 
identifying and standardizing PV knowledge elements, (6) developing cognitive 
services, and (7) reviewing and validating cognitive services.
RESULTS: By applying the framework, we (1) identified 51 decision points as 
candidates for AI use, (2) standardized the process to make PV knowledge 
explicit, (3) embedded SMEs in the process to preserve PV knowledge and context, 
(4) standardized acceptability by using established quality inspection 
principles, and (5) validated a total of 126 cognitive services.
CONCLUSION: The value of using AI methodologies in PV is compelling; however, as 
PV is highly regulated, acceptability will require assurances of quality, 
consistency, and standardization. We are proposing a foundational framework that 
the industry can use to identify and validate services to better support the 
gathering of quality data and to better serve the PV professional.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-019-00269-0
PMID: 31933254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Cheminform. 2022 Apr 15;14(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s13321-022-00602-x.

Machine learning to predict metabolic drug interactions related to cytochrome 
P450 isozymes.

Wang NN(#)(1)(2)(3), Wang XG(#)(2)(4), Xiong GL(3), Yang ZY(3), Lu AP(5), Chen 
X(6), Liu S(7)(8), Hou TJ(9), Cao DS(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Xiangya School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410013, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Eye Center of Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(5)Advancing Translational Medicine in Bone and Joint Diseases, School of 
Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, SAR, People's 
Republic of China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hunan Engineering Research Center of Skin Health 
and Disease, Hunan Key Laboratory of Skin Cancer and Psoriasis, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Hunan, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China. liushao999@csu.edu.cn.
(8)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China. 
liushao999@csu.edu.cn.
(9)Innovation Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine of Zhejiang 
University, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
310058, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. tingjunhou@zju.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China. oriental-cds@163.com.
(11)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China. 
oriental-cds@163.com.
(12)Xiangya School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410013, Hunan, People's Republic of China. oriental-cds@163.com.
(13)Advancing Translational Medicine in Bone and Joint Diseases, School of 
Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, SAR, People's 
Republic of China. oriental-cds@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) often causes serious adverse reactions and thus 
results in inestimable economic and social loss. Currently, comprehensive DDI 
evaluation has become a major challenge in pharmaceutical research due to the 
time-consuming and costly process of the experimental assessment and it is of 
high necessity to develop effective in silico methods to predict and evaluate 
DDIs accurately and efficiently. In this study, based on a large number of 
substrates and inhibitors related to five important CYP450 isozymes (CYP1A2, 
CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4), a series of high-performance predictive 
models for metabolic DDIs were constructed by two machine learning methods 
(random forest and XGBoost) and 4 different types of descriptors (MOE_2D, CATS, 
ECFP4 and MACCS). To reduce the uncertainty of individual models, the consensus 
method was applied to yield more reliable predictions. A series of evaluations 
illustrated that the consensus models were more reliable and robust for the DDI 
predictions of new drug combination. For the internal validation, the whole 
prediction accuracy and AUC value of the DDI models were around 0.8 and 0.9, 
respectively. When it was applied to the external datasets, the model accuracy 
was 0.793 and 0.795 for multi-level validation and external validation, 
respectively. Furthermore, we also compared our model with some recently 
published tools and then applied the final model to predict FDA-approved drugs 
and proposed 54,013 possible drug pairs with potential DDIs. In summary, we 
developed a powerful DDI predictive model from the perspective of the CYP450 
enzyme family and it will help a lot in the future drug development and clinical 
pharmacy research.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-022-00602-x
PMCID: PMC9013037
PMID: 35428354

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


199. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2018 Jul;161:25-38. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2018.03.021. Epub 2018 Apr 14.

Supervised signal detection for adverse drug reactions in medication dispensing 
data.

Hoang T(1), Liu J(2), Roughead E(3), Pratt N(3), Li J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, University of 
South Australia, Mawson Lakes Boulevard, South Australia 5095, Australia. 
Electronic address: tao.hoang@mymail.unisa.edu.au.
(2)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, University of 
South Australia, Mawson Lakes Boulevard, South Australia 5095, Australia.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South Australia, City 
East Campus, North Terrace Adelaide, South Australia 5001, Australia.

MOTIVATION: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are one of the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality and thus should be detected early to reduce consequences 
on health outcomes. Medication dispensing data are comprehensive sources of 
information about medicine uses that can be utilized for the signal detection of 
ADRs. Sequence symmetry analysis (SSA) has been employed in previous studies to 
detect signals of ADRs from medication dispensing data, but it has a moderate 
sensitivity and tends to miss some ADR signals. With successful applications in 
various areas, supervised machine learning (SML) methods are promising in 
detecting ADR signals. Gold standards of known ADRs and non- ADRs from previous 
studies create opportunities to take into account additional domain knowledge to 
improve ADR signal detection with SML.
OBJECTIVE: We assess the utility of SML as a signal detection tool for ADRs in 
medication dispensing data with the consideration of domain knowledge from 
DrugBank and MedDRA. We compare the best performing SML method with SSA.
METHODS: We model the ADR signal detection problem as a supervised machine 
learning problem by linking medication dispensing data with domain knowledge 
bases. Suspected ADR signals are extracted from the Australian Pharmaceutical 
Benefit Scheme (PBS) medication dispensing data from 2013 to 2016. We construct 
predictive features for each signal candidate based on its occurrences in 
medication dispensing data as well as its pharmacological properties. 
Pharmaceutical knowledge bases including DrugBank and MedDRA are employed to 
provide pharmacological features for a signal candidate. Given a gold standard 
of known ADRs and non-ADRs, SML learns to differentiate between known ADRs and 
non-ADRs based on their combined predictive features from linked sources, and 
then predicts whether a new case is a potential ADR signal.
RESULTS: We evaluate the performance of six widely used SML methods with two 
gold standards of known ADRs and non-ADRs from previous studies. On average, 
gradient boosting classifier achieves the sensitivity of 77%, specificity of 
81%, positive predictive value of 76%, negative predictive value of 82%, area 
under precision-recall curve of 81%, and area under receiver operating 
characteristic curve of 82%, most of which are higher than in other SML methods. 
In particular, gradient boosting classifier has 21% higher sensitivity than and 
comparable specificity with SSA. Furthermore, gradient boosting classifier 
detects 10% more unknown potential ADR signals than SSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that gradient boosting classifier is a 
promising supervised signal detection tool for ADRs in medication dispensing 
data to complement SSA.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2018.03.021
PMID: 29852965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Transl Sci. 2022 Jun;15(6):1500-1506. doi: 10.1111/cts.13268. Epub 2022 Apr 
3.

Machine learning approach to identify adverse events in scientific biomedical 
literature.

Wewering S(1), Pietsch C(1), Sumner M(2), Markó K(2), Lülf-Averhoff AT(1), 
Baehrens D(2).

Author information:
(1)Scientific & Competitive Intelligence, Bayer AG, Wuppertal, Germany.
(2)Averbis GmbH, Freiburg, Germany.

Monitoring the occurrence of adverse events in the scientific literature is a 
mandatory process in drug marketing surveillance. This is a very time-consuming 
and complex task to fulfill the compliance and, most importantly, to ensure 
patient safety. Therefore, a machine learning (ML) algorithm has been trained to 
support this manual intellectual review process, by automatically providing a 
classification of the literature articles into two types. An algorithm has been 
designed to automatically classify "relevant articles" which are reporting any 
kind of drug safety relevant information, and those which are not reporting an 
adverse drug reaction as "not relevant." The review process is consisted of many 
rules and aspects which needed to be taken into consideration. Therefore, for 
the training of the algorithm, thousands of documents from previous screenings 
have been used. After several iterations of adjustments and fine tuning, the ML 
approach is definitively a great achievement in pre-sorting the articles into 
"relevant" and "non-relevant" and supporting the intellectual review process.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.13268
PMCID: PMC9199879
PMID: 35266644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sonja Wewering, Claudia Pietsch, and 
Anna‐Theresa Lulf‐Averhoff are employees of Bayer AG. All other authors declared 
no competing interests for this work.


201. JMIR Med Inform. 2017 Dec 8;5(4):e51. doi: 10.2196/medinform.9170.

Adverse Drug Event Discovery Using Biomedical Literature: A Big Data Neural 
Network Adventure.

P Tafti A(1), Badger J(1), LaRose E(1), Shirzadi E(2), Mahnke A(1), Mayer J(1), 
Ye Z(1), Page D(3), Peissig P(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Research Center, Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, 
Marshfield, WI, United States.
(2)Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.

BACKGROUND: The study of adverse drug events (ADEs) is a tenured topic in 
medical literature. In recent years, increasing numbers of scientific articles 
and health-related social media posts have been generated and shared daily, 
albeit with very limited use for ADE study and with little known about the 
content with respect to ADEs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop a big data analytics strategy 
that mines the content of scientific articles and health-related Web-based 
social media to detect and identify ADEs.
METHODS: We analyzed the following two data sources: (1) biomedical articles and 
(2) health-related social media blog posts. We developed an intelligent and 
scalable text mining solution on big data infrastructures composed of Apache 
Spark, natural language processing, and machine learning. This was combined with 
an Elasticsearch No-SQL distributed database to explore and visualize ADEs.
RESULTS: The accuracy, precision, recall, and area under receiver operating 
characteristic of the system were 92.7%, 93.6%, 93.0%, and 0.905, respectively, 
and showed better results in comparison with traditional approaches in the 
literature. This work not only detected and classified ADE sentences from big 
data biomedical literature but also scientifically visualized ADE interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to investigate 
a big data machine learning strategy for ADE discovery on massive datasets 
downloaded from PubMed Central and social media. This contribution illustrates 
possible capacities in big data biomedical text analysis using advanced 
computational methods with real-time update from new data published on a daily 
basis.

©Ahmad P Tafti, Jonathan Badger, Eric LaRose, Ehsan Shirzadi, Andrea Mahnke, 
John Mayer, Zhan Ye, David Page, Peggy Peissig. Originally published in JMIR 
Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 08.12.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.9170
PMCID: PMC5741828
PMID: 29222076

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


202. Drug Saf. 2019 Jun;42(6):807. doi: 10.1007/s40264-019-00820-7.

Correction to: A Machine-Learning Algorithm to Optimise Automated Adverse Drug 
Reaction Detection from Clinical Coding.

McMaster C(1)(2), Liew D(3)(4), Keith C(5), Aminian P(5), Frauman A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Austin Health, Level 5, Lance Townsend 
Building, Studley Rd, Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia. 
christopher.mcmaster@austin.org.au.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia. 
christopher.mcmaster@austin.org.au.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Austin Health, Level 5, Lance Townsend 
Building, Studley Rd, Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.

Erratum for
    Drug Saf. 2019 Jun;42(6):721-725.

CK: Principal Investigator. CM and CK were responsible for the study design and 
conception; all authors were responsible for acquisition and validation of the 
data; CM was responsible for analysis and interpretation of the data; and all 
authors contributed to reviewing drafts of the manuscript and approved the final 
version for publication.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-019-00820-7
PMID: 30989591


203. J Biomed Inform. 2020 May;105:103419. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103419. Epub 2020 
Apr 13.

Neural negated entity recognition in Spanish electronic health records.

Santiso S(1), Pérez A(2), Casillas A(3), Oronoz M(4).

Author information:
(1)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), ManuelLardizabal 1, 
20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: sara.santiso@ehu.eus.
(2)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), ManuelLardizabal 1, 
20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: alicia.perez@ehu.eus.
(3)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), ManuelLardizabal 1, 
20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: arantza.casillas@ehu.eus.
(4)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), ManuelLardizabal 1, 
20080 Donostia, Spain. Electronic address: maite.oronoz@ehu.eus.

This work deals with negation detection in the context of clinical texts. 
Negation detection is a key for decision support systems since negated events 
(detection of absence of some events) help ascertain current medical conditions. 
For artificial intelligence, negation detection is a valuable point as it can 
revert the meaning of a part of a text and, accordingly, influence other tasks 
such as medical dosage adjustment, the detection of adverse drug reactions or 
hospital acquired diseases. We focus on negated medical events such as 
disorders, findings and allergies. From Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
background, we refer to them as negated medical entities. A novelty of this work 
is that we approached this task as Named Entity Recognition (NER) with the 
restriction that just negated medical entities must be recognized (in an attempt 
to help distinguish them from non-negated ones). Our study is driven with 
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) written in Spanish. A challenge to cope with is 
the lexical variability (alternative medical forms, abbreviations, etc.). To 
this end, we employed an approach based on deep learning. Specifically, the 
system combines character embeddings to cope with out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words, 
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks to model contextual representations and 
it makes use of Conditional Random Fields (CRF) to classify each medical entity 
as either negated or not given the contextual dense representation. Moreover, we 
explored both embeddings created from words and embeddings created from lemmas. 
The best results were obtained with the lemmatized embeddings. Apparently, this 
approach reinforced the capability of the LSTMs to cope with the high lexical 
variability. The f-measure for exact-match was 65.1 and 82.4 for the 
partial-match.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103419
PMID: 32298847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


204. J Biomed Semantics. 2012 Dec 20;3(1):15. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-15.

Extraction of potential adverse drug events from medical case reports.

Gurulingappa H(1), Mateen-Rajput A, Toldo L.

Author information:
(1), Merck KGaA, Frankfurterstraße 250, Darmstadt 64293, Germany. 
luca.toldo@merckgroup.com.

: The sheer amount of information about potential adverse drug events published 
in medical case reports pose major challenges for drug safety experts to perform 
timely monitoring. Efficient strategies for identification and extraction of 
information about potential adverse drug events from free-text resources are 
needed to support pharmacovigilance research and pharmaceutical decision making. 
Therefore, this work focusses on the adaptation of a machine learning-based 
system for the identification and extraction of potential adverse drug event 
relations from MEDLINE case reports. It relies on a high quality corpus that was 
manually annotated using an ontology-driven methodology. Qualitative evaluation 
of the system showed robust results. An experiment with large scale relation 
extraction from MEDLINE delivered under-identified potential adverse drug events 
not reported in drug monographs. Overall, this approach provides a scalable 
auto-assistance platform for drug safety professionals to automatically collect 
potential adverse drug events communicated as free-text data.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-15
PMCID: PMC3599676
PMID: 23256479


205. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Oct 1;26(10):943-951. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz048.

Learning to detect and understand drug discontinuation events from clinical 
narratives.

Liu F(1), Pradhan R(1), Druhl E(2), Freund E(1), Liu W(3), Sauer BC(4), 
Cunningham F(5), Gordon AJ(6)(7), Peters CB(4)(6), Yu H(2)(3)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Bedford VA Medical Center, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Departments of Internal Medicine and Biomedical Informatics, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(5)Department of Veterans Affairs Pharmacy Benefits Management Services, Hines, 
Illinois, USA.
(6)Informatics, Decision-Enhancement, and Analytic Sciences Center (IDEAS 2.0), 
VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(7)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, 
Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Identifying drug discontinuation (DDC) events and understanding their 
reasons are important for medication management and drug safety surveillance. 
Structured data resources are often incomplete and lack reason information. In 
this article, we assessed the ability of natural language processing (NLP) 
systems to unlock DDC information from clinical narratives automatically.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We collected 1867 de-identified providers' notes from the 
University of Massachusetts Medical School hospital electronic health record 
system. Then 2 human experts chart reviewed those clinical notes to annotate DDC 
events and their reasons. Using the annotated data, we developed and evaluated 
NLP systems to automatically identify drug discontinuations and reasons at the 
sentence level using a novel semantic enrichment-based vector representation 
(SEVR) method for enhanced feature representation.
RESULTS: Our SEVR-based NLP system achieved the best performance of 0.785 
(AUC-ROC) for detecting discontinuation events and 0.745 (AUC-ROC) for 
identifying reasons when testing this highly imbalanced data, outperforming 2 
state-of-the-art non-SEVR-based models. Compared with a rule-based baseline 
system for discontinuation detection, our system improved the sensitivity 
significantly (57.75% vs 18.31%, absolute value) while retaining a high 
specificity of 99.25%, leading to a significant improvement in AUC-ROC by 32.83% 
(absolute value).
CONCLUSION: Experiments have shown that a high-performance NLP system can be 
developed to automatically identify DDCs and their reasons from providers' 
notes. The SEVR model effectively improved the system performance showing better 
generalization and robustness on unseen test data. Our work is an important step 
toward identifying reasons for drug discontinuation that will inform drug safety 
surveillance and pharmacovigilance.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 2019. This work is written by US Government employees 
and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz048
PMCID: PMC6748801
PMID: 31034028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Nov;99:103285. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103285. Epub 2019 
Sep 20.

A two-stage deep learning approach for extracting entities and relationships 
from medical texts.

Suárez-Paniagua V(1), Rivera Zavala RM(2), Segura-Bedmar I(3), Martínez P(4).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Leganés 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: vspaniag@inf.uc3m.es.
(2)Computer Science Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Leganés 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: renzomauricio.rivera@alumnos.uc3m.es.
(3)Computer Science Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Leganés 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: isegura@inf.uc3m.es.
(4)Computer Science Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Leganés 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: pmf@inf.uc3m.es.

This work presents a two-stage deep learning system for Named Entity Recognition 
(NER) and Relation Extraction (RE) from medical texts. These tasks are a crucial 
step to many natural language understanding applications in the biomedical 
domain. Automatic medical coding of electronic medical records, automated 
summarizing of patient records, automatic cohort identification for clinical 
studies, text simplification of health documents for patients, early detection 
of adverse drug reactions or automatic identification of risk factors are only a 
few examples of the many possible opportunities that the text analysis can offer 
in the clinical domain. In this work, our efforts are primarily directed towards 
the improvement of the pharmacovigilance process by the automatic detection of 
drug-drug interactions (DDI) from texts. Moreover, we deal with the semantic 
analysis of texts containing health information for patients. Our two-stage 
approach is based on Deep Learning architectures. Concretely, NER is performed 
combining a bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) and a Conditional 
Random Field (CRF), while RE applies a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Since 
our approach uses very few language resources, only the pre-trained word 
embeddings, and does not exploit any domain resources (such as dictionaries or 
ontologies), this can be easily expandable to support other languages and 
clinical applications that require the exploitation of semantic information 
(concepts and relationships) from texts. During the last years, the task of DDI 
extraction has received great attention by the BioNLP community. However, the 
problem has been traditionally evaluated as two separate subtasks: drug name 
recognition and extraction of DDIs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first work that provides an evaluation of the whole pipeline. Moreover, our 
system obtains state-of-the-art results on the eHealth-KD challenge, which was 
part of the Workshop on Semantic Analysis at SEPLN (TASS-2018).

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103285
PMID: 31546016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Jun 28;7(6):e30137. doi: 10.2196/30137.

The Use of Social Media in Detecting Drug Safety-Related New Black Box Warnings, 
Labeling Changes, or Withdrawals: Scoping Review.

Lee JY(#)(1), Lee YS(#)(2), Kim DH(1), Lee HS(1), Yang BR(1), Kim MG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Social media has become a new source for obtaining real-world data 
on adverse drug reactions. Many studies have investigated the use of social 
media to detect early signals of adverse drug reactions. However, the 
trustworthiness of signals derived from social media is questionable. To confirm 
this, a confirmatory study with a positive control (eg, new black box warnings, 
labeling changes, or withdrawals) is required.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the use of social media in detecting new 
black box warnings, labeling changes, or withdrawals in advance.
METHODS: This scoping review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews checklist. A 
researcher searched PubMed and EMBASE in January 2021. Original studies 
analyzing black box warnings, labeling changes, or withdrawals from social media 
were selected, and the results of the studies were summarized.
RESULTS: A total of 14 studies were included in this scoping review. Most 
studies (8/14, 57.1%%) collected data from a single source, and 10 (71.4%) used 
specialized health care social networks and forums. The analytical methods used 
in these studies varied considerably. Three studies (21.4%) manually annotated 
posts, while 5 (35.7%) adopted machine learning algorithms. Nine studies (64.2%) 
concluded that social media could detect signals 3 months to 9 years before 
action from regulatory authorities. Most of these studies (8/9, 88.9%) were 
conducted on specialized health care social networks and forums. On the 
contrary, 5 (35.7%) studies yielded modest or negative results. Of these, 2 
(40%) used generic social networking sites, 2 (40%) used specialized health care 
networks and forums, and 1 (20%) used both generic social networking sites and 
specialized health care social networks and forums. The most recently published 
study recommends not using social media for pharmacovigilance. Several 
challenges remain in using social media for pharmacovigilance regarding 
coverage, data quality, and analytic processing.
CONCLUSIONS: Social media, along with conventional pharmacovigilance measures, 
can be used to detect signals associated with new black box warnings, labeling 
changes, or withdrawals. Several challenges remain; however, social media will 
be useful for signal detection of frequently mentioned drugs in specialized 
health care social networks and forums. Further studies are required to advance 
natural language processing and mine real-world data on social media.

©Jae-Young Lee, Yae-Seul Lee, Dong Hyun Kim, Han Sol Lee, Bo Ram Yang, Myeong 
Gyu Kim. Originally published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance 
(https://publichealth.jmir.org), 28.06.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/30137
PMCID: PMC8277336
PMID: 34185021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


208. J Biomed Inform. 2017 Feb;66:72-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.12.005. Epub 2016 
Dec 16.

Accuracy of an automated knowledge base for identifying drug adverse reactions.

Voss EA(1), Boyce RD(2), Ryan PB(3), van der Lei J(4), Rijnbeek PR(4), Schuemie 
MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Analytics, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Raritan, NJ, 
United States; Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 
Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI), New York, NY, United 
States. Electronic address: evoss3@its.jnj.com.
(2)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Observational Health 
Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI), New York, NY, United States.
(3)Epidemiology Analytics, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Raritan, NJ, 
United States; Columbia University, New York, NY, United States; Observational 
Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI), New York, NY, United States.
(4)Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Observational 
Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI), New York, NY, United States.
(5)Epidemiology Analytics, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Raritan, NJ, 
United States; Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI), New 
York, NY, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Drug safety researchers seek to know the degree of certainty with 
which a particular drug is associated with an adverse drug reaction. There are 
different sources of information used in pharmacovigilance to identify, 
evaluate, and disseminate medical product safety evidence including spontaneous 
reports, published peer-reviewed literature, and product labels. Automated data 
processing and classification using these evidence sources can greatly reduce 
the manual curation currently required to develop reference sets of positive and 
negative controls (i.e. drugs that cause adverse drug events and those that do 
not) to be used in drug safety research.
METHODS: In this paper we explore a method for automatically aggregating 
disparate sources of information together into a single repository, developing a 
predictive model to classify drug-adverse event relationships, and applying 
those predictions to a real world problem of identifying negative controls for 
statistical method calibration.
RESULTS: Our results showed high predictive accuracy for the models combining 
all available evidence, with an area under the receiver-operator curve of ⩾0.92 
when tested on three manually generated lists of drugs and conditions that are 
known to either have or not have an association with an adverse drug event.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from a pilot implementation of the method suggests that it 
is feasible to develop a scalable alternative to the 
time-and-resource-intensive, manual curation exercise previously applied to 
develop reference sets of positive and negative controls to be used in drug 
safety research.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.12.005
PMCID: PMC5316295
PMID: 27993747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2021 May 27;281:1110-1111. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210368.

Visualising Patterns Associated with Adverse Drug Reactions in French Forums.

Allam N(1)(2), Audeh B(1), Jaulent MC(1), Bousquet C(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Université Paris 13, Laboratoire d'Informatique 
Médicale et d'Ingénierie des Connaissances en e-Santé, Paris, France.
(2)ESIEE Paris graduate school of engineering, Noisy-le-Grand, France.

As social media are an interesting source of information for pharmacovigilance, 
we implemented a novel visualisation method for pharmacovigilance specialists 
applied to French discussion forums. A word embedding model was trained on posts 
to facilitate the identification of patterns associated with adverse drug 
reactions.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210368
PMID: 34042861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Pharmacol Sci. 2017 Feb;133(2):70-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jphs.2017.01.003. Epub 
2017 Jan 28.

Machine learning-based prediction of adverse drug effects: An example of 
seizure-inducing compounds.

Gao M(1), Igata H(2), Takeuchi A(2), Sato K(3), Ikegaya Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan; iPS-non Clinical Experiments for Nervous System (iNCENS) 
Project, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan.
(3)iPS-non Clinical Experiments for Nervous System (iNCENS) Project, Japan; 
Division of Pharmacology, National Institute of Health Sciences, Tokyo 158-8501, 
Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan; iPS-non Clinical Experiments for Nervous System (iNCENS) 
Project, Japan; Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute 
of Information and Communications Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Electronic 
address: yuji@ikegaya.jp.

Various biological factors have been implicated in convulsive seizures, 
involving side effects of drugs. For the preclinical safety assessment of drug 
development, it is difficult to predict seizure-inducing side effects. Here, we 
introduced a machine learning-based in vitro system designed to detect 
seizure-inducing side effects. We recorded local field potentials from the CA1 
alveus in acute mouse neocortico-hippocampal slices, while 14 drugs were 
bath-perfused at 5 different concentrations each. For each experimental 
condition, we collected seizure-like neuronal activity and merged their 
waveforms as one graphic image, which was further converted into a feature 
vector using Caffe, an open framework for deep learning. In the space of the 
first two principal components, the support vector machine completely separated 
the vectors (i.e., doses of individual drugs) that induced seizure-like events 
and identified diphenhydramine, enoxacin, strychnine and theophylline as 
"seizure-inducing" drugs, which indeed were reported to induce seizures in 
clinical situations. Thus, this artificial intelligence-based classification may 
provide a new platform to detect the seizure-inducing side effects of 
preclinical drugs.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphs.2017.01.003
PMID: 28215473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2013 Nov;22(11):1189-94. doi: 10.1002/pds.3493. Epub 
2013 Aug 12.

Automatic detection of adverse events to predict drug label changes using text 
and data mining techniques.

Gurulingappa H(1), Toldo L, Rajput AM, Kors JA, Taweel A, Tayrouz Y.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Connections Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess the impact of automatically 
detected adverse event signals from text and open-source data on the prediction 
of drug label changes.
METHODS: Open-source adverse effect data were collected from FAERS, Yellow Cards 
and SIDER databases. A shallow linguistic relation extraction system (JSRE) was 
applied for extraction of adverse effects from MEDLINE case reports. Statistical 
approach was applied on the extracted datasets for signal detection and 
subsequent prediction of label changes issued for 29 drugs by the UK Regulatory 
Authority in 2009.
RESULTS: 76% of drug label changes were automatically predicted. Out of these, 
6% of drug label changes were detected only by text mining. JSRE enabled precise 
identification of four adverse drug events from MEDLINE that were undetectable 
otherwise.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in drug labels can be predicted automatically using data 
and text mining techniques. Text mining technology is mature and well-placed to 
support the pharmacovigilance tasks.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.3493
PMID: 23935003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. JAMIA Open. 2022 Jun 11;5(2):ooac043. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooac043. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

How can natural language processing help model informed drug development?: a 
review.

Bhatnagar R(1), Sardar S(2), Beheshti M(2), Podichetty JT(2).

Author information:
(1)Data Science, Data Collaboration Center, Critical Path Institute, Tucson, 
Arizona, USA.
(2)Quantitative Medicine, Critical Path Institute, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To summarize applications of natural language processing (NLP) in 
model informed drug development (MIDD) and identify potential areas of 
improvement.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Publications found on PubMed and Google Scholar, websites 
and GitHub repositories for NLP libraries and models. Publications describing 
applications of NLP in MIDD were reviewed. The applications were stratified into 
3 stages: drug discovery, clinical trials, and pharmacovigilance. Key NLP 
functionalities used for these applications were assessed. Programming libraries 
and open-source resources for the implementation of NLP functionalities in MIDD 
were identified.
RESULTS: NLP has been utilized to aid various processes in drug development 
lifecycle such as gene-disease mapping, biomarker discovery, patient-trial 
matching, adverse drug events detection, etc. These applications commonly use 
NLP functionalities of named entity recognition, word embeddings, entity 
resolution, assertion status detection, relation extraction, and topic modeling. 
The current state-of-the-art for implementing these functionalities in MIDD 
applications are transformer models that utilize transfer learning for enhanced 
performance. Various libraries in python, R, and Java like huggingface, 
sparkNLP, and KoRpus as well as open-source platforms such as DisGeNet, 
DeepEnroll, and Transmol have enabled convenient implementation of NLP models to 
MIDD applications.
DISCUSSION: Challenges such as reproducibility, explainability, fairness, 
limited data, limited language-support, and security need to be overcome to 
ensure wider adoption of NLP in MIDD landscape. There are opportunities to 
improve the performance of existing models and expand the use of NLP in newer 
areas of MIDD.
CONCLUSIONS: This review provides an overview of the potential and pitfalls of 
current NLP approaches in MIDD.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooac043
PMCID: PMC9188322
PMID: 35702625


213. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 16;7(1):3690. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03914-3.

Machine learning workflow to enhance predictions of Adverse Drug Reactions 
(ADRs) through drug-gene interactions: application to drugs for cutaneous 
diseases.

Raja K(1), Patrick M(1), Elder JT(1), Tsoi LC(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA. alextsoi@umich.edu.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. alextsoi@umich.edu.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
alextsoi@umich.edu.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) pose critical public health issues, affecting over 
6% of hospitalized patients. While knowledge of potential drug-drug interactions 
(DDI) is necessary to prevent ADR, the rapid pace of drug discovery makes it 
challenging to maintain a strong insight into DDIs. In this study, we present a 
novel literature-mining framework for enhancing the predictions of DDIs and ADR 
types by integrating drug-gene interactions (DGIs). The ADR types were adapted 
from a DDI corpus, including i) adverse effect; ii) effect at molecular level; 
iii) effect related to pharmacokinetics; and iv) DDIs without known ADRs. By 
using random forest classifier our approach achieves an F-score of 0.87 across 
the ADRs classification using only the DDI features. We then enhanced the 
performance of the classifier by including DGIs (F-score = 0.90), and applied 
the classification model trained with the DDI corpus to identify the drugs that 
might interact with the drugs for cutaneous diseases. We successfully predict 
previously known ADRs for drugs prescribed to cutaneous diseases, and are also 
able to identify promising new ADRs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03914-3
PMCID: PMC5473874
PMID: 28623363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


214. Pharmaceutics. 2019 Aug 2;11(8):377. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics11080377.

Comparison of Target Features for Predicting Drug-Target Interactions by Deep 
Neural Network Based on Large-Scale Drug-Induced Transcriptome Data.

Lee H(1), Kim W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, College of Natural Science, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul 03760, Korea.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, College of Natural Science, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul 03760, Korea. wkim@ewha.ac.kr.

Uncovering drug-target interactions (DTIs) is pivotal to understand drug 
mode-of-action (MoA), avoid adverse drug reaction (ADR), and seek opportunities 
for drug repositioning (DR). For decades, in silico predictions for DTIs have 
largely depended on structural information of both targets and compounds, e.g., 
docking or ligand-based virtual screening. Recently, the application of deep 
neural network (DNN) is opening a new path to uncover novel DTIs for thousands 
of targets. One important question is which features for targets are most 
relevant to DTI prediction. As an early attempt to answer this question, we 
objectively compared three canonical target features extracted from: (i) the 
expression profiles by gene knockdown (GEPs); (ii) the protein-protein 
interaction network (PPI network); and (iii) the pathway membership (PM) of a 
target gene. For drug features, the large-scale drug-induced transcriptome 
dataset, or the Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) 
L1000 dataset was used. All these features are closely related to protein 
function or drug MoA, of which utility is only sparsely investigated. In 
particular, few studies have compared the three types of target features in 
DNN-based DTI prediction under the same evaluation scheme. Among the three 
target features, the PM and the PPI network show similar performances superior 
to GEPs. DNN models based on both features consistently outperformed other 
machine learning methods such as naïve Bayes, random forest, or logistic 
regression.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics11080377
PMCID: PMC6723794
PMID: 31382356

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


215. JAMIA Open. 2019 Jul 1;2(3):378-385. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz022. eCollection 
2019 Oct.

Inferring new relations between medical entities using literature curated term 
co-occurrences.

Spiro A(1), Fernández García J(1), Yanover C(1).

Author information:
(1)Machine Learning for Healthcare and Life Sciences, Department of Health 
Informatics, IBM Research, Haifa, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: Identifying new relations between medical entities, such as drugs, 
diseases, and side effects, is typically a resource-intensive task, involving 
experimentation and clinical trials. The increased availability of related data 
and curated knowledge enables a computational approach to this task, notably by 
training models to predict likely relations. Such models rely on meaningful 
representations of the medical entities being studied. We propose a generic 
features vector representation that leverages co-occurrences of medical terms, 
linked with PubMed citations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed 
representation by inferring two types of relations: a drug causes a side effect 
and a drug treats an indication. To predict these relations and assess their 
effectiveness, we applied 2 modeling approaches: multi-task modeling using 
neural networks and single-task modeling based on gradient boosting machines and 
logistic regression.
RESULTS: These trained models, which predict either side effects or indications, 
obtained significantly better results than baseline models that use a single 
direct co-occurrence feature. The results demonstrate the advantage of a 
comprehensive representation.
DISCUSSION: Selecting the appropriate representation has an immense impact on 
the predictive performance of machine learning models. Our proposed 
representation is powerful, as it spans multiple medical domains and can be used 
to predict a wide range of relation types.
CONCLUSION: The discovery of new relations between various medical entities can 
be translated into meaningful insights, for example, related to drug development 
or disease understanding. Our representation of medical entities can be used to 
train models that predict such relations, thus accelerating healthcare-related 
discoveries.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz022
PMCID: PMC6951958
PMID: 31984370


216. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):407-418. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01156-5. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacovigilance: An Introduction to Terms, 
Concepts, Applications, and Limitations.

Aronson JK(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, Nuffield Department of Primary Care 
Health Sciences, Oxford, UK. jeffrey.aronson@phc.ox.ac.uk.

The tools of artificial intelligence (AI) have enormous potential to enhance 
activities in pharmacovigilance. Pharmacovigilance experts need not be AI 
experts, but they should know enough about AI to explore the possibilities of 
collaboration with those who are. Modern concepts of AI date from Alan Turing's 
work, especially his paper on "the imitation game", in the late 1940s and early 
1950s. Its scope today includes computational skills, including the formulation 
of mathematical proofs; visual perception, including facial recognition and 
virtual reality; decision making by expert systems; aspects of language, such as 
language processing, speech recognition, creative composition, and translation; 
and combinations of these, e.g. in self-driving vehicles. Machines can be 
programmed with the ability to learn, using neural networks that mimic cognitive 
actions of the human brain, leading to deep structural learning. Limitations of 
AI include difficulties with language, arising from the need to understand 
context and interpret ambiguities, which particularly affect translation, and 
inadequacies of databases, requiring careful preparation and curation. New 
techniques may cause unforeseen difficulties via unexpected malfunctioning. 
Relevant terms and concepts include different types of machine learning, neural 
networks, natural language programming, ontologies, and expert systems. Adoption 
of the tools of AI in pharmacovigilance has been slow. Machine learning, in 
conjunction with natural language processing and data mining, to study adverse 
drug reactions in databases such as those found in electronic health records, 
claims databases, and social media, has the potential to enhance the 
characterization of known adverse effects and reactions and detect new signals.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01156-5
PMID: 35579806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2018 May 9;4(2):e51. doi: 
10.2196/publichealth.8214.

Causality Patterns for Detecting Adverse Drug Reactions From Social Media: Text 
Mining Approach.

Bollegala D(1), Maskell S(#)(1), Sloane R(1), Hajne J(1), Pirmohamed M(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Detecting adverse drug reactions (ADRs) is an important task that 
has direct implications for the use of that drug. If we can detect previously 
unknown ADRs as quickly as possible, then this information can be provided to 
the regulators, pharmaceutical companies, and health care organizations, thereby 
potentially reducing drug-related morbidity and saving lives of many patients. A 
promising approach for detecting ADRs is to use social media platforms such as 
Twitter and Facebook. A high level of correlation between a drug name and an 
event may be an indication of a potential adverse reaction associated with that 
drug. Although numerous association measures have been proposed by the signal 
detection community for identifying ADRs, these measures are limited in that 
they detect correlations but often ignore causality.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to propose a causality measure that can detect an 
adverse reaction that is caused by a drug rather than merely being a correlated 
signal.
METHODS: To the best of our knowledge, this was the first causality-sensitive 
approach for detecting ADRs from social media. Specifically, the relationship 
between a drug and an event was represented using a set of automatically 
extracted lexical patterns. We then learned the weights for the extracted 
lexical patterns that indicate their reliability for expressing an adverse 
reaction of a given drug.
RESULTS: Our proposed method obtains an ADR detection accuracy of 74% on a 
large-scale manually annotated dataset of tweets, covering a standard set of 
drugs and adverse reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: By using lexical patterns, we can accurately detect the causality 
between drugs and adverse reaction-related events.

©Danushka Bollegala, Simon Maskell, Richard Sloane, Joanna Hajne, Munir 
Pirmohamed. Originally published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance 
(http://publichealth.jmir.org), 09.05.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/publichealth.8214
PMCID: PMC5966656
PMID: 29743155

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


218. Pharmacotherapy. 2018 Aug;38(8):822-841. doi: 10.1002/phar.2151. Epub 2018 Jul 
22.

Natural Language Processing and Its Implications for the Future of Medication 
Safety: A Narrative Review of Recent Advances and Challenges.

Wong A(1)(2), Plasek JM(2)(3), Montecalvo SP(4), Zhou L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Therapeutics, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine and Primary Care, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)Boston Networking Solutions, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

The safety of medication use has been a priority in the United States since the 
late 1930s. Recently, it has gained prominence due to the increasing amount of 
data suggesting that a large amount of patient harm is preventable and can be 
mitigated with effective risk strategies that have not been sufficiently 
adopted. Adverse events from medications are part of clinical practice, but the 
ability to identify a patient's risk and to minimize that risk must be a 
priority. The ability to identify adverse events has been a challenge due to 
limitations of available data sources, which are often free text. The use of 
natural language processing (NLP) may help to address these limitations. NLP is 
the artificial intelligence domain of computer science that uses computers to 
manipulate unstructured data (i.e., narrative text or speech data) in the 
context of a specific task. In this narrative review, we illustrate the 
fundamentals of NLP and discuss NLP's application to medication safety in four 
data sources: electronic health records, Internet-based data, published 
literature, and reporting systems. Given the magnitude of available data from 
these sources, a growing area is the use of computer algorithms to help 
automatically detect associations between medications and adverse effects. The 
main benefit of NLP is in the time savings associated with automation of various 
medication safety tasks such as the medication reconciliation process 
facilitated by computers, as well as the potential for near-real-time 
identification of adverse events for postmarketing surveillance such as those 
posted on social media that would otherwise go unanalyzed. NLP is limited by a 
lack of data sharing between health care organizations due to insufficient 
interoperability capabilities, inhibiting large-scale adverse event monitoring 
across populations. We anticipate that future work in this area will focus on 
the integration of data sources from different domains to improve the ability to 
identify potential adverse events more quickly and to improve clinical decision 
support with regard to a patient's estimated risk for specific adverse events at 
the time of medication prescription or review.

© 2018 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.2151
PMID: 29884988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Nov;281:112598. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.112598. Epub 
2019 Oct 3.

Antipsychotic drugs and sudden cardiac death: A literature review of the 
challenges in the prediction, management, and future steps.

Zhu J(1), Hou W(2), Xu Y(3), Ji F(4), Wang G(5), Chen C(1), Lin C(1), Lin X(1), 
Li J(6), Zhuo C(7), Shao M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, 325000, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan, 450001, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, First Hospital/First Clinical Medical College of 
Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China,; MDT Center for Cognitive Impairment 
and Sleep Disorders, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, 
China; National Key Disciplines, Key Laboratory for Cellular Physiology, 
Ministry of Education, Department of Neurobiology, Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, China.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, School of Mental Health, Psychiatric Genetics 
Laboratory (PSYG-Lab), Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 272191, 
China.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Linyi Mental Health Center, Linyi, Shandong, 
271000, China.
(6)Department of Psychiatric-Neuroimaging-Genetics and Morbidity Laboratory 
(PNGC-Lab), Nankai University Affiliated Anding Hospital, Tianjin Mental Health 
Center, Mental Health Teaching Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 
300222, China.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, School of Mental Health, Psychiatric Genetics 
Laboratory (PSYG-Lab), Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 272191, 
China; Department of Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, 325000, China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450001, China; Department of 
Psychiatric-Neuroimaging-Genetics and Morbidity Laboratory (PNGC-Lab), Nankai 
University Affiliated Anding Hospital, Tianjin Mental Health Center, Mental 
Health Teaching Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300222, China; 
Department of China-Canada Biological Psychiatry Lab, Xiamen Xianyue Hospital, 
Xiamen, Fujian, 361000, China.
(8)National Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine Center for 
Cardiovascular Disease, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 100029, China.

Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is relatively uncommon, yet it is a deadly 
consequence of some antipsychotic medications in patients with psychiatric 
disorders. The widespread concerns about the adverse cardiac effects associated 
with antipsychotics and their unpredictable nature have led to a restriction on 
the use of some antipsychotic medications. Recent progress has been made in the 
identification of important genetic factors that may contribute to the adverse 
complication of antipsychotic drugs, suggesting that high-risk individuals can 
be identified prior to initiating therapy. In addition, some high-tech smart 
wearable medical devices have recently been developed, allowing users to record 
and analyze the electrocardiogram (ECG) in couple with artificial intelligence 
(AI) technologies, and notifying of irregular heart rhythms or arrhythmias, a 
medical condition well documented in most SCD cases. In this literature review, 
we summarize recent advances in understanding the link between SCD and 
antipsychotic drug usage, as well as in utilizing wearable medical devices for 
monitoring of cardiac arrhythmias. New strategies for improving the care of 
patients receiving antipsychotic medications are proposed. As it is now possible 
to evaluate the risk of SCD in patients on antipsychotic medications, 
preventative measures and close monitoring may be used to detect the early signs 
of adverse cardiac events and SCD.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.112598
PMID: 31622875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Apr;105(4):954-961. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1255. Epub 2018 
Dec 11.

Innovation in Pharmacovigilance: Use of Artificial Intelligence in Adverse Event 
Case Processing.

Schmider J(1), Kumar K(2), LaForest C(3), Swankoski B(4), Naim K(5), Caubel 
PM(6).

Author information:
(1)Pfizer R&D, Lake Forest, Illinois, USA.
(2)Pfizer Business Technology, Artificial Intelligence Center of Excellence, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Pfizer Global Product Development, Safety Solutions, Kirkland, Quebec, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Pfizer Finance and Business Operations, Peapack, New Jersey, USA.
(5)Pfizer R&D, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Pfizer R&D, New York, New York, USA.

Automation of pharmaceutical safety case processing represents a significant 
opportunity to affect the strongest cost driver for a company's overall 
pharmacovigilance budget. A pilot was undertaken to test the feasibility of 
using artificial intelligence and robotic process automation to automate 
processing of adverse event reports. The pilot paradigm was used to 
simultaneously test proposed solutions of three commercial vendors. The result 
confirmed the feasibility of using artificial intelligence-based technology to 
support extraction from adverse event source documents and evaluation of case 
validity. In addition, the pilot demonstrated viability of the use of safety 
database data fields as a surrogate for otherwise time-consuming and costly 
direct annotation of source documents. Finally, the evaluation and scoring 
method used in the pilot was able to differentiate vendor capabilities and 
identify the best candidate to move into the discovery phase.

© 2018 Pfizer Inc. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1255
PMCID: PMC6590385
PMID: 30303528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.


221. J Med Internet Res. 2013 Jun 18;15(6):e124. doi: 10.2196/jmir.2614.

Postmarket drug surveillance without trial costs: discovery of adverse drug 
reactions through large-scale analysis of web search queries.

Yom-Tov E(1), Gabrilovich E.

Author information:
(1)Yahoo Research, New York, NY 10018, USA. eladyt@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Postmarket drug safety surveillance largely depends on spontaneous 
reports by patients and health care providers; hence, less common adverse drug 
reactions--especially those caused by long-term exposure, multidrug treatments, 
or those specific to special populations--often elude discovery.
OBJECTIVE: Here we propose a low cost, fully automated method for continuous 
monitoring of adverse drug reactions in single drugs and in combinations 
thereof, and demonstrate the discovery of heretofore-unknown ones.
METHODS: We used aggregated search data of large populations of Internet users 
to extract information related to drugs and adverse reactions to them, and 
correlated these data over time. We further extended our method to identify 
adverse reactions to combinations of drugs.
RESULTS: We validated our method by showing high correlations of our findings 
with known adverse drug reactions (ADRs). However, although acute early-onset 
drug reactions are more likely to be reported to regulatory agencies, we show 
that less acute later-onset ones are better captured in Web search queries.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method is advantageous in identifying previously unknown 
adverse drug reactions. These ADRs should be considered as candidates for 
further scrutiny by medical regulatory authorities, for example, through phase 4 
trials.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.2614
PMCID: PMC3713931
PMID: 23778053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


222. Ther Innov Regul Sci. 2018 Jul;52(4):400-402. doi: 10.1177/2168479018766887. 
Epub 2018 Apr 1.

Advancing Drug Safety Through Prospective Pharmacovigilance.

Pitts PJ(1), Le Louet H(2).

Author information:
(1)1 President of the Center for Medicine in the Public Interest, Former 
Associate Commissioner, United States Food and Drug Administration, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)2 International Society of Pharmacovigilance, Créteil, France.

Much has changed in a relatively short period of time. There is a raging debate 
over the level of evidence expected to first introduce a treatment to patients 
based on smaller, more adaptive data sets. Some argue for less data followed by 
postapproval follow-up, others for more adaptive clinical trial designs and 
end-point modification driven by patient-focused drug development and use of 
real-world evidence. The transition in both the review and postmarketing 
regulatory framework is happening in front of our eyes in real time. To improve 
the ability of patients to receive high-quality, safe, effective, and timely 
care, better information via pharmacovigilance must be a priority as the world's 
many regulatory systems build the capacity to harness electronic health 
information to improve health, care quality, and safety. Globally, the widely 
variable ability of nations to build reliable regulatory systems (from precise 
review to robust pharmacovigilance) is a dangerous source of health care 
inequality. Developing validated tools and techniques for "predictive 
pharmacovigilance" will assist all health systems in better understanding the 
risks and benefits of the medicines they regulate by understanding what should 
be happening once a new medicine moves from risk-benefit regulatory efficacy to 
real-world risk-effectiveness. This will be of particular utility for smaller 
regulatory agencies with fewer resources. By comparing preapproval predictive 
pharmacovigilance data, developing regulatory authorities will be able to better 
understand the potential gap between what was predicted and what was actually 
measured (via more traditional pharmacovigilance methodologies). Predictive 
pharmacovigilance recognizes the value of understanding the imperfect reporting 
of real-world clinical use and that the absence of reporting is, in itself, an 
important postmarketing signal.

DOI: 10.1177/2168479018766887
PMID: 29714580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2021 Jun 12;28(6):1074-1080. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa219.

Associations of physicians' prescribing experience, work hours, and workload 
with prescription errors.

Leviatan I(1), Oberman B(2), Zimlichman E(1)(3), Stein GY(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health Policy Research, Tel HaShomer, 
Ramat Gan, Israel.
(3)Management Wing, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel HaShomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(4)Internal Medicine "A," Meir Medical Center, Clalit Health Services, Kfar 
Saba, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to assess associations of physician's work overload, 
successive work shifts, and work experience with physicians' risk to err.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This large-scale study included physicians who prescribed 
at least 100 systemic medications at Sheba Medical Center during 2012-2017 in 
all acute care departments, excluding intensive care units. Presumed medication 
errors were flagged by a high-accuracy computerized decision support system that 
uses machine-learning algorithms to detect potential medication prescription 
errors. Physicians' successive work shifts (first or only shift, second, and 
third shifts), workload (assessed by the number of prescriptions during a shift) 
and work-experience, as well as a novel measurement of physicians' prescribing 
experience with a specific drug, were assessed per prescription. The risk to err 
was determined for various work conditions.
RESULTS: 1 652 896 medical orders were prescribed by 1066 physicians; The system 
flagged 3738 (0.23%) prescriptions as erroneous. Physicians were 8.2 times more 
likely to err during high than normal-low workload shifts (5.19% vs 0.63%, 
P < .0001). Physicians on their third or second successive shift (compared to a 
first or single shift) were more likely to err (2.1%, 1.8%, and 0.88%, 
respectively, P < .001). Lack of experience in prescribing a specific medication 
was associated with higher error rate (0.37% for the first 5 prescriptions vs 
0.13% after over 40, P < .001).
DISCUSSION: Longer hours and less experience in prescribing a specific 
medication increase risk of erroneous prescribing.
CONCLUSION: Restricting successive shifts, reducing workload, increasing 
training and supervision, and implementing smart clinical decision support 
systems may help reduce prescription errors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa219
PMCID: PMC8200263
PMID: 33120412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2022 Mar-Apr;19(2):1105-1116. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2020.3020016. Epub 2022 Apr 1.

Relation Extraction From Biomedical and Clinical Text: Unified Multitask 
Learning Framework.

Yadav S, Ramesh S, Saha S, Ekbal A.

MOTIVATION: To minimize the accelerating amount of time invested on the 
biomedical literature search, numerous approaches for automated knowledge 
extraction have been proposed. Relation extraction is one such task where 
semantic relations between the entities are identified from the free text. In 
the biomedical domain, extraction of regulatory pathways, metabolic processes, 
adverse drug reaction or disease models necessitates knowledge from the 
individual relations, for example, physical or regulatory interactions between 
genes, proteins, drugs, chemical, disease or phenotype.
RESULTS: In this paper, we study the relation extraction task from three major 
biomedical and clinical tasks, namely drug-drug interaction, protein-protein 
interaction, and medical concept relation extraction. Towards this, we model the 
relation extraction problem in a multi-task learning (MTL)framework, and 
introduce for the first time the concept of structured self-attentive network 
complemented with the adversarial learning approach for the prediction of 
relationships from the biomedical and clinical text. The fundamental notion of 
MTL is to simultaneously learn multiple problems together by utilizing the 
concepts of the shared representation. Additionally, we also generate the highly 
efficient single task model which exploits the shortest dependency path 
embedding learned over the attentive gated recurrent unit to compare our 
proposed MTL models. The framework we propose significantly improves over all 
the baselines (deep learning techniques)and single-task models for predicting 
the relationships, without compromising on the performance of all the tasks.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2020.3020016
PMID: 32853152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Bioinformatics. 2016 Aug 1;32(15):2338-45. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw168. 
Epub 2016 Apr 1.

Drug-induced adverse events prediction with the LINCS L1000 data.

Wang Z(1), Clark NR(1), Ma'ayan A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place Box 1215, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

MOTIVATION: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are a central consideration during 
drug development. Here we present a machine learning classifier to prioritize 
ADRs for approved drugs and pre-clinical small-molecule compounds by combining 
chemical structure (CS) and gene expression (GE) features. The GE data is from 
the Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) L1000 
dataset that measured changes in GE before and after treatment of human cells 
with over 20 000 small-molecule compounds including most of the FDA-approved 
drugs. Using various benchmarking methods, we show that the integration of GE 
data with the CS of the drugs can significantly improve the predictability of 
ADRs. Moreover, transforming GE features to enrichment vectors of biological 
terms further improves the predictive capability of the classifiers. The most 
predictive biological-term features can assist in understanding the drug 
mechanisms of action. Finally, we applied the classifier to all  >20 000 
small-molecules profiled, and developed a web portal for browsing and searching 
predictive small-molecule/ADR connections.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The interface for the adverse event predictions 
for the  >20 000 LINCS compounds is available at http://maayanlab.net/SEP-L1000/ 
CONTACT: avi.maayan@mssm.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw168
PMCID: PMC4965635
PMID: 27153606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Oct 6;17(Suppl 13):335. doi: 10.1186/s12859-016-1220-5.

Leveraging graph topology and semantic context for pharmacovigilance through 
twitter-streams.

Eshleman R(1), Singh R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, San Francisco State University, San 
Francisco, CA, 94132, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, San Francisco State University, San 
Francisco, CA, 94132, USA. rahul@sfsu.edu.
(3)Center for Discovery and Innovation in Parasitic Diseases, University of 
California, San Diego, USA. rahul@sfsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug events (ADEs) constitute one of the leading causes of 
post-therapeutic death and their identification constitutes an important 
challenge of modern precision medicine. Unfortunately, the onset and effects of 
ADEs are often underreported complicating timely intervention. At over 500 
million posts per day, Twitter is a commonly used social media platform. The 
ubiquity of day-to-day personal information exchange on Twitter makes it a 
promising target for data mining for ADE identification and intervention. Three 
technical challenges are central to this problem: (1) identification of salient 
medical keywords in (noisy) tweets, (2) mapping drug-effect relationships, and 
(3) classification of such relationships as adverse or non-adverse.
METHODS: We use a bipartite graph-theoretic representation called a drug-effect 
graph (DEG) for modeling drug and side effect relationships by representing the 
drugs and side effects as vertices. We construct individual DEGs on two data 
sources. The first DEG is constructed from the drug-effect relationships found 
in FDA package inserts as recorded in the SIDER database. The second DEG is 
constructed by mining the history of Twitter users. We use dictionary-based 
information extraction to identify medically-relevant concepts in tweets. Drugs, 
along with co-occurring symptoms are connected with edges weighted by temporal 
distance and frequency. Finally, information from the SIDER DEG is integrate 
with the Twitter DEG and edges are classified as either adverse or non-adverse 
using supervised machine learning.
RESULTS: We examine both graph-theoretic and semantic features for the 
classification task. The proposed approach can identify adverse drug effects 
with high accuracy with precision exceeding 85 % and F1 exceeding 81 %. When 
compared with leading methods at the state-of-the-art, which employ un-enriched 
graph-theoretic analysis alone, our method leads to improvements ranging between 
5 and 8 % in terms of the aforementioned measures. Additionally, we employ our 
method to discover several ADEs which, though present in medical literature and 
Twitter-streams, are not represented in the SIDER databases.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a DEG integration model as a powerful formalism for the 
analysis of drug-effect relationships that is general enough to accommodate 
diverse data sources, yet rigorous enough to provide a strong mechanism for ADE 
identification.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-016-1220-5
PMCID: PMC5073861
PMID: 27766937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2022 May 4;17(5):e0267901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267901. 
eCollection 2022.

Identification of hand-foot syndrome from cancer patients' blog posts: 
BERT-based deep-learning approach to detect potential adverse drug reaction 
symptoms.

Nishioka S(1), Watanabe T(1), Asano M(1), Yamamoto T(1), Kawakami K(2), Yada 
S(3), Aramaki E(3), Yajima H(4), Kizaki H(1), Hori S(1).

Author information:
(1)Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy, Division of Drug Informatics, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for 
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan.
(4)Mediaid Corporation, Tokyo, Japan.

Early detection and management of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) is crucial for 
improving patients' quality of life. Hand-foot syndrome (HFS) is one of the most 
problematic ADRs for cancer patients. Recently, an increasing number of patients 
post their daily experiences to internet community, for example in blogs, where 
potential ADR signals not captured through routine clinic visits can be 
described. Therefore, this study aimed to identify patients with potential ADRs, 
focusing on HFS, from internet blogs by using natural language processing (NLP) 
deep-learning methods. From 10,646 blog posts, written in Japanese by cancer 
patients, 149 HFS-positive sentences were extracted after pre-processing, 
annotation and scrutiny by a certified oncology pharmacist. The HFS-positive 
sentences described not only HFS typical expressions like "pain" or "spoon 
nail", but also patient-derived unique expressions like onomatopoeic ones. The 
dataset was divided at a 4 to 1 ratio and used to train and evaluate three NLP 
deep-learning models: long short-term memory (LSTM), bidirectional LSTM and 
bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT). The BERT model 
gave the best performance with precision 0.63, recall 0.82 and f1 score 0.71 in 
the HFS user identification task. Our results demonstrate that this NLP 
deep-learning model can successfully identify patients with potential HFS from 
blog posts, where patients' real wordings on symptoms or impacts on their daily 
lives are described. Thus, it should be feasible to utilize patient-generated 
text data to improve ADR management for individual patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267901
PMCID: PMC9067685
PMID: 35507636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HY is the CEO of Mediaid Corporation, which 
operates LifePalette. The other author(s) declare no competing interests.


228. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2019 Sep;23(5):2148-2155. doi: 
10.1109/JBHI.2018.2879744. Epub 2018 Nov 5.

Exploring Joint AB-LSTM With Embedded Lemmas for Adverse Drug Reaction 
Discovery.

Santiso S, Perez A, Casillas A.

This work focuses on the detection of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in 
electronic health records (EHRs) written in Spanish. The World Health 
Organization underlines the importance of reporting ADRs for patients' safety. 
The fact is that ADRs tend to be under-reported in daily hospital praxis. In 
this context, automatic solutions based on text mining can help to alleviate the 
workload of experts. Nevertheless, these solutions pose two challenges: 1) EHRs 
show high lexical variability, the characterization of the events must be able 
to deal with unseen words or contexts and 2) ADRs are rare events, hence, the 
system should be robust against skewed class distribution. To tackle these 
challenges, deep neural networks seem appropriate because they allow a 
high-level representation. Specifically, we opted for a joint AB-LSTM network, a 
sub-class of the bidirectional long short-term memory network. Besides, in an 
attempt to reinforce lexical variability, we proposed the use of embeddings 
created using lemmas. We compared this approach with supervised event extraction 
approaches based on either symbolic or dense representations. Experimental 
results showed that the joint AB-LSTM approach outperformed previous approaches, 
achieving an f-measure of 73.3.

DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2018.2879744
PMID: 30403644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Math Biosci. 2018 Dec;306:136-144. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2018.09.010. Epub 2018 Oct 
5.

A similarity-based method for prediction of drug side effects with heterogeneous 
information.

Zhao X(1), Chen L(2), Lu J(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Information Engineering, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 
201306, People's Republic of China.
(2)College of Information Engineering, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 
201306, People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of PMMP, East China 
Normal University, Shanghai 200241, People's Republic of China. Electronic 
address: lchen@shmtu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology and Drug 
Evaluation (Yantai University), Ministry of Education, Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Advanced Drug Delivery System and Biotech Drugs in Universities of 
Shandong, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, People's Republic of China.

Drugs can produce intended therapeutic effects to treat different diseases. 
However, they may also cause side effects at the same time. For an approved 
drug, it is best to detect all side effects it can produce. Otherwise, it may 
bring great risks for pharmaceuticals companies as well as be harmful to human 
body. It is urgent to design quick and reliable identification methods to detect 
the side effects for a given drug. In this study, a binary classification model 
was proposed to predict drug side effects. Different from most previous methods, 
our model termed the pair of drug and side effect as a sample and convert the 
original problem to a binary classification problem. Based on the similarity 
idea, each pair was represented by five features, each of which was derived from 
a type of drug property. The strong machine learning algorithm, random forest, 
was adopted as the prediction engine. The ten-fold cross-validation on five 
datasets with different negative samples indicated that the proposed model 
yielded a good performance of Matthews correlation coefficient around 0.550 and 
AUC around 0.8492. In addition, we also analyzed the contribution of each drug 
property for construction of the model. The results indicated that drug 
similarity in fingerprint was most related to the prediction of drug side 
effects and all drug properties gave less or more contributions.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2018.09.010
PMID: 30296417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017 Jul 1;24(4):813-821. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocw180.

Deep learning for pharmacovigilance: recurrent neural network architectures for 
labeling adverse drug reactions in Twitter posts.

Cocos A(1), Fiks AG(1), Masino AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz013.

OBJECTIVE: Social media is an important pharmacovigilance data source for 
adverse drug reaction (ADR) identification. Human review of social media data is 
infeasible due to data quantity, thus natural language processing techniques are 
necessary. Social media includes informal vocabulary and irregular grammar, 
which challenge natural language processing methods. Our objective is to develop 
a scalable, deep-learning approach that exceeds state-of-the-art ADR detection 
performance in social media.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We developed a recurrent neural network (RNN) model that 
labels words in an input sequence with ADR membership tags. The only input 
features are word-embedding vectors, which can be formed through 
task-independent pretraining or during ADR detection training.
RESULTS: Our best-performing RNN model used pretrained word embeddings created 
from a large, non-domain-specific Twitter dataset. It achieved an approximate 
match F-measure of 0.755 for ADR identification on the dataset, compared to 
0.631 for a baseline lexicon system and 0.65 for the state-of-the-art 
conditional random field model. Feature analysis indicated that semantic 
information in pretrained word embeddings boosted sensitivity and, combined with 
contextual awareness captured in the RNN, precision.
DISCUSSION: Our model required no task-specific feature engineering, suggesting 
generalizability to additional sequence-labeling tasks. Learning curve analysis 
showed that our model reached optimal performance with fewer training examples 
than the other models.
CONCLUSION: ADR detection performance in social media is significantly improved 
by using a contextually aware model and word embeddings formed from large, 
unlabeled datasets. The approach reduces manual data-labeling requirements and 
is scalable to large social media datasets.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocw180
PMCID: PMC7651964
PMID: 28339747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2018 Oct 1;25(10):1311-1321. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy097.

A chronological pharmacovigilance network analytics approach for predicting 
adverse drug events.

Davazdahemami B(1), Delen D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Center for Health 
Systems Innovation, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.

OBJECTIVES: This study extends prior research by combining a chronological 
pharmacovigilance network approach with machine-learning (ML) techniques to 
predict adverse drug events (ADEs) based on the drugs' similarities in terms of 
the proteins they target in the human body. The focus of this research, though, 
is particularly centered on predicting the drug-ADE associations for a set of 8 
common and high-risk ADEs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: large collection of annotated MEDLINE biomedical articles 
was used to construct a drug-ADE network, and the network was further equipped 
with information about drugs' target proteins. Several network metrics were 
extracted and used as predictors in ML algorithms to predict the existence of 
network edges (ie, associations or relationships).
RESULTS: Gradient boosted trees (GBTs) as an ensemble ML algorithm outperformed 
other prediction methods in identifying the drug-ADE associations with an 
overall accuracy of 92.8% on the validation sample. The prediction model was 
able to predict drug-ADE associations, on average, 3.84 years earlier than they 
were actually mentioned in the biomedical literature.
CONCLUSION: While network analysis and ML techniques were used in separation in 
prior ADE studies, our results showed that they, in combination with each other, 
can boost the power of one another and predict better. Moreover, our results 
highlight the superior capability of ensemble-type ML methods in capturing 
drug-ADE patterns compared to the regular (ie, singular), ML algorithms.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy097
PMCID: PMC7646912
PMID: 30085102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Feb;90:103091. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.12.005. Epub 2019 
Jan 4.

A systematic approach for developing a corpus of patient reported adverse drug 
events: A case study for SSRI and SNRI medications.

Zolnoori M(1), Fung KW(2), Patrick TB(3), Fontelo P(4), Kharrazi H(5), Faiola 
A(6), Wu YSS(7), Eldredge CE(8), Luo J(3), Conway M(9), Zhu J(10), Park SK(11), 
Xu K(7), Moayyed H(12), Goudarzvand S(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Milwaukee, 
WI, United States; Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, 
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
United States; Section of Medical Informatics, Department of Health Science 
Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. Electronic address: 
Zolnoori.Maryam@Mayo.edu.
(2)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library 
of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. 
Electronic address: kfung@mail.nih.gov.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Milwaukee, 
WI, United States.
(4)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library 
of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. 
Electronic address: pfontelo@mail.nih.gov.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Department of Biomedical and Health Information Sciences, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(7)School of Pharmacy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(8)School of Information, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United States.
(9)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Utah University, Salt Lake City, United 
States.
(10)Emmes Corporation, Rockville, MD, United States.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United 
States.
(12)College of Letters and Science, University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, WI, 
United States.
(13)School of Computing and Engineering, University of Missouri-Kansas, Kansas 
City, MO, United States.

"Psychiatric Treatment Adverse Reactions" (PsyTAR) corpus is an annotated corpus 
that has been developed using patients narrative data for psychiatric 
medications, particularly SSRIs (Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor) and 
SNRIs (Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor) medications. This corpus 
consists of three main components: sentence classification, entity 
identification, and entity normalization. We split the review posts into 
sentences and labeled them for presence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) (2168 
sentences), withdrawal symptoms (WDs) (438 sentences), sign/symptoms/illness 
(SSIs) (789 sentences), drug indications (517), drug effectiveness (EF) (1087 
sentences), and drug infectiveness (INF) (337 sentences). In the entity 
identification phase, we identified and extracted ADRs (4813 mentions), WDs (590 
mentions), SSIs (1219 mentions), and DIs (792). In the entity normalization 
phase, we mapped the identified entities to the corresponding concepts in both 
UMLS (918 unique concepts) and SNOMED CT (755 unique concepts). Four annotators 
double coded the sentences and the span of identified entities by strictly 
following guidelines rules developed for this study. We used the PsyTAR sentence 
classification component to automatically train a range of supervised machine 
learning classifiers to identifying text segments with the mentions of ADRs, 
WDs, DIs, SSIs, EF, and INF. SVMs classifiers had the highest performance with 
F-Score 0.90. We also measured performance of the cTAKES (clinical Text Analysis 
and Knowledge Extraction System) in identifying patients' expressions of ADRs 
and WDs with and without adding PsyTAR dictionary to the core dictionary of 
cTAKES. Augmenting cTAKES dictionary with PsyTAR improved the F-score cTAKES by 
25%. The findings imply that PsyTAR has significant implications for text mining 
algorithms aimed to identify information about adverse drug events and drug 
effectiveness from patients' narratives data, by linking the patients' 
expressions of adverse drug events to medical standard vocabularies. The corpus 
is publicly available at Zolnoori et al. [30].

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.12.005
PMID: 30611893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Brief Bioinform. 2017 Jan;18(1):160-178. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbw001. Epub 2016 Feb 
5.

Bridging semantics and syntax with graph algorithms-state-of-the-art of 
extracting biomedical relations.

Luo Y, Uzuner Ö, Szolovits P.

Erratum in
    Brief Bioinform. 2017 Jul 1;18(4):722.

Research on extracting biomedical relations has received growing attention 
recently, with numerous biological and clinical applications including those in 
pharmacogenomics, clinical trial screening and adverse drug reaction detection. 
The ability to accurately capture both semantic and syntactic structures in text 
expressing these relations becomes increasingly critical to enable deep 
understanding of scientific papers and clinical narratives. Shared task 
challenges have been organized by both bioinformatics and clinical informatics 
communities to assess and advance the state-of-the-art research. Significant 
progress has been made in algorithm development and resource construction. In 
particular, graph-based approaches bridge semantics and syntax, often achieving 
the best performance in shared tasks. However, a number of problems at the 
frontiers of biomedical relation extraction continue to pose interesting 
challenges and present opportunities for great improvement and fruitful 
research. In this article, we place biomedical relation extraction against the 
backdrop of its versatile applications, present a gentle introduction to its 
general pipeline and shared resources, review the current state-of-the-art in 
methodology advancement, discuss limitations and point out several promising 
future directions.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbw001
PMCID: PMC5221425
PMID: 26851224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Drug Saf. 2019 Jan;42(1):113-122. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-0765-9.

Adverse Drug Event Detection from Electronic Health Records Using Hierarchical 
Recurrent Neural Networks with Dual-Level Embedding.

Wunnava S(1), Qin X(2), Kakar T(2), Sen C(2), Rundensteiner EA(2), Kong X(2).

Author information:
(1)Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA, 01609, USA. 
swunnava@wpi.edu.
(2)Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA, 01609, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Adverse drug event (ADE) detection is a vital step towards 
effective pharmacovigilance and prevention of future incidents caused by 
potentially harmful ADEs. The electronic health records (EHRs) of patients in 
hospitals contain valuable information regarding ADEs and hence are an important 
source for detecting ADE signals. However, EHR texts tend to be noisy. Yet 
applying off-the-shelf tools for EHR text preprocessing jeopardizes the 
subsequent ADE detection performance, which depends on a well tokenized text 
input.
OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we report our experience with the NLP Challenges for 
Detecting Medication and Adverse Drug Events from Electronic Health Records 
(MADE1.0), which aims to promote deep innovations on this subject. In 
particular, we have developed rule-based sentence and word tokenization 
techniques to deal with the noise in the EHR text.
METHODS: We propose a detection methodology by adapting a three-layered, deep 
learning architecture of (1) recurrent neural network [bi-directional long 
short-term memory (Bi-LSTM)] for character-level word representation to encode 
the morphological features of the medical terminology, (2) Bi-LSTM for capturing 
the contextual information of each word within a sentence, and (3) conditional 
random fields for the final label prediction by also considering the surrounding 
words. We experiment with different word embedding methods commonly used in 
word-level classification tasks and demonstrate the impact of an integrated 
usage of both domain-specific and general-purpose pre-trained word embedding for 
detecting ADEs from EHRs.
RESULTS: Our system was ranked first for the named entity recognition task in 
the MADE1.0 challenge, with a micro-averaged F1-score of 0.8290 (official 
score).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the integration of two widely used 
sequence labeling techniques that complement each other along with dual-level 
embedding (character level and word level) to represent words in the input layer 
results in a deep learning architecture that achieves excellent information 
extraction accuracy for EHR notes.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-0765-9
PMID: 30649736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014 Mar 4;15:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-64.

Knowledge-based extraction of adverse drug events from biomedical text.

Kang N(1), Singh B, Bui C, Afzal Z, van Mulligen EM, Kors JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, P,O, 
Box 2040, 3000, CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. n.kang@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Many biomedical relation extraction systems are machine-learning 
based and have to be trained on large annotated corpora that are expensive and 
cumbersome to construct. We developed a knowledge-based relation extraction 
system that requires minimal training data, and applied the system for the 
extraction of adverse drug events from biomedical text. The system consists of a 
concept recognition module that identifies drugs and adverse effects in 
sentences, and a knowledge-base module that establishes whether a relation 
exists between the recognized concepts. The knowledge base was filled with 
information from the Unified Medical Language System. The performance of the 
system was evaluated on the ADE corpus, consisting of 1644 abstracts with 
manually annotated adverse drug events. Fifty abstracts were used for training, 
the remaining abstracts were used for testing.
RESULTS: The knowledge-based system obtained an F-score of 50.5%, which was 34.4 
percentage points better than the co-occurrence baseline. Increasing the 
training set to 400 abstracts improved the F-score to 54.3%. When the system was 
compared with a machine-learning system, jSRE, on a subset of the sentences in 
the ADE corpus, our knowledge-based system achieved an F-score that is 7 
percentage points higher than the F-score of jSRE trained on 50 abstracts, and 
still 2 percentage points higher than jSRE trained on 90% of the corpus.
CONCLUSION: A knowledge-based approach can be successfully used to extract 
adverse drug events from biomedical text without need for a large training set. 
Whether use of a knowledge base is equally advantageous for other biomedical 
relation-extraction tasks remains to be investigated.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-64
PMCID: PMC3973995
PMID: 24593054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Int J Med Inform. 2017 Jun;102:130-137. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.03.013. 
Epub 2017 Mar 23.

Estimation of the prevalence of adverse drug reactions from social media.

Nguyen T(1), Larsen ME(2), O'Dea B(3), Phung D(4), Venkatesh S(5), Christensen 
H(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics, Deakin University, 
Australia. Electronic address: thin.nguyen@deakin.edu.au.
(2)Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, Australia. Electronic 
address: mark.larsen@blackdog.org.au.
(3)Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, Australia. Electronic 
address: b.odea@blackdog.org.au.
(4)Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics, Deakin University, 
Australia. Electronic address: dinh.phung@deakin.edu.au.
(5)Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics, Deakin University, 
Australia. Electronic address: svetha.venkatesh@deakin.edu.au.
(6)Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, Australia. Electronic 
address: h.christensen@blackdog.org.au.

This work aims to estimate the degree of adverse drug reactions (ADR) for 
psychiatric medications from social media, including Twitter, Reddit, and 
LiveJournal. Advances in lightning-fast cluster computing was employed to 
process large scale data, consisting of 6.4 terabytes of data containing 3.8 
billion records from all the media. Rates of ADR were quantified using the SIDER 
database of drugs and side-effects, and an estimated ADR rate was based on the 
prevalence of discussion in the social media corpora. Agreement between these 
measures for a sample of ten popular psychiatric drugs was evaluated using the 
Pearson correlation coefficient, r, with values between 0.08 and 0.50. Word2vec, 
a novel neural learning framework, was utilized to improve the coverage of 
variants of ADR terms in the unstructured text by identifying syntactically or 
semantically similar terms. Improved correlation coefficients, between 0.29 and 
0.59, demonstrates the capability of advanced techniques in machine learning to 
aid in the discovery of meaningful patterns from medical data, and social media 
data, at scale.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.03.013
PMID: 28495341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Jul;88(1):52-9. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2009.248. Epub 2010 
Mar 10.

Prediction of adverse drug reactions using decision tree modeling.

Hammann F(1), Gutmann H, Vogt N, Helma C, Drewe J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Basel, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Drug safety is of great importance to public health. The detrimental effects of 
drugs not only limit their application but also cause suffering in individual 
patients and evoke distrust of pharmacotherapy. For the purpose of identifying 
drugs that could be suspected of causing adverse reactions, we present a 
structure-activity relationship analysis of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in the 
central nervous system (CNS), liver, and kidney, and also of allergic reactions, 
for a broad variety of drugs (n = 507) from the Swiss drug registry. Using 
decision tree induction, a machine learning method, we determined the chemical, 
physical, and structural properties of compounds that predispose them to causing 
ADRs. The models had high predictive accuracies (78.9-90.2%) for allergic, 
renal, CNS, and hepatic ADRs. We show the feasibility of predicting complex 
end-organ effects using simple models that involve no expensive computations and 
that can be used (i) in the selection of the compound during the drug discovery 
stage, (ii) to understand how drugs interact with the target organ systems, and 
(iii) for generating alerts in postmarketing drug surveillance and 
pharmacovigilance.

DOI: 10.1038/clpt.2009.248
PMID: 20220749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Drug Saf. 2020 Jan;43(1):67-77. doi: 10.1007/s40264-019-00872-9.

Complementing Observational Signals with Literature-Derived Distributed 
Representations for Post-Marketing Drug Surveillance.

Mower J(1), Cohen T(2), Subramanian D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77018, USA. 
jmm21@rice.edu.
(2)University of Washington, Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, 
Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77018, USA.

INTRODUCTION: As a result of the well documented limitations of data collected 
by spontaneous reporting systems (SRS), such as bias and under-reporting, a 
number of authors have evaluated the utility of other data sources for the 
purpose of pharmacovigilance, including the biomedical literature. Previous work 
has demonstrated the utility of literature-derived distributed representations 
(concept embeddings) with machine learning for the purpose of drug side-effect 
prediction. In terms of data sources, these methods are complementary, observing 
drug safety from two different perspectives (knowledge extracted from the 
literature and statistics from SRS data). However, the combined utility of these 
pharmacovigilance methods has yet to be evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: This research investigates the utility of directly or indirectly 
combining an observational signal from SRS with literature-derived distributed 
representations into a single feature vector or in an ensemble approach for 
downstream machine learning (logistic regression).
METHODS: Leveraging a recently developed representation scheme, concept 
embeddings were generated from relational connections extracted from the 
literature and composed to represent drug and associated adverse reactions, as 
defined by two reference standards of positive (likely causal) and negative (no 
causal evidence) pairs. Embeddings were presented with and without common 
measures of observational signal from SRS sources to logistic regressors, and 
performance was evaluated with the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) area 
under the curve (AUC) metric.
RESULTS: ROC AUC performance with these composite models improves up to ≈ 20% 
over SRS-based disproportionality metrics alone and exceeds the best prior 
results reported in the literature when models leverage both sources of 
information.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from this study support the hypothesis that knowledge 
extracted from the literature can enhance the performance of SRS-based methods 
(and vice versa). Across reference sets, using literature and SRS information 
together performed better than using either source alone, providing strong 
support for the complementary nature of these approaches to post-marketing drug 
surveillance.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-019-00872-9
PMCID: PMC7243821
PMID: 31646442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Justin Mower, Trevor 
Cohen, and Devika Subramanian have no conflicts of interest relevant to the 
content of this study.


239. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017 Feb 20;30(2):642-656. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.6b00385. Epub 2017 Feb 2.

Deep Learning to Predict the Formation of Quinone Species in Drug Metabolism.

Hughes TB(1), Swamidass SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine , Campus Box 8118, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, 
United States.

Many adverse drug reactions are thought to be caused by electrophilically 
reactive drug metabolites that conjugate to nucleophilic sites within DNA and 
proteins, causing cancer or toxic immune responses. Quinone species, including 
quinone-imines, quinone-methides, and imine-methides, are electrophilic Michael 
acceptors that are often highly reactive and comprise over 40% of all known 
reactive metabolites. Quinone metabolites are created by cytochromes P450 and 
peroxidases. For example, cytochromes P450 oxidize acetaminophen to 
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine, which is electrophilically reactive and 
covalently binds to nucleophilic sites within proteins. This reactive quinone 
metabolite elicits a toxic immune response when acetaminophen exceeds a safe 
dose. Using a deep learning approach, this study reports the first published 
method for predicting quinone formation: the formation of a quinone species by 
metabolic oxidation. We model both one- and two-step quinone formation, enabling 
accurate quinone formation predictions in nonobvious cases. We predict atom 
pairs that form quinones with an AUC accuracy of 97.6%, and we identify 
molecules that form quinones with 88.2% AUC. By modeling the formation of 
quinones, one of the most common types of reactive metabolites, our method 
provides a rapid screening tool for a key drug toxicity risk. The XenoSite 
quinone formation model is available at 
http://swami.wustl.edu/xenosite/p/quinone .

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.6b00385
PMCID: PMC5871348
PMID: 28099803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The content is solely the responsibility 
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the 
National Institutes of Health. The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


240. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2019 Oct;28(10):1309-1317. doi: 10.1002/pds.4857. 
Epub 2019 Aug 7.

Comparison of text processing methods in social media-based signal detection.

Gavrielov-Yusim N(1), Kürzinger ML(2), Nishikawa C(2), Pan C(3), Pouget J(4), 
Epstein LB(1), Golant Y(1), Tcherny-Lessenot S(2), Lin S(5), Hamelin B(6), 
Juhaeri J(3).

Author information:
(1)R&D, Data2Life, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Epidemiology and Benefit Risk Evaluation, Sanofi, Chilly-Mazarin, France.
(3)Epidemiology and Benefit Risk Evaluation, Sanofi, Bridgewater, NJ, USA.
(4)Information Technology and Solutions, R&D CMO - SC Real World Evidence, 
Sanofi, Lyon, France.
(5)Global Pharmacovigilance, Sanofi, Bridgewater, NJ, USA.
(6)Medical Evidence Generation, Sanofi, Paris, France.

PURPOSE: Adverse event (AE) identification in social media (SM) can be performed 
using various types of natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning 
(ML). These methods can be categorized by complexity and precision level. 
Co-occurrence-based ML methods are rather basic, as they identify simultaneous 
appearance of drugs and clinical events in a single post. In contrast, 
statistical learning methods involve more complex NLP and identify drugs, 
events, and associations between them. We aimed to compare the ability of 
co-occurrence and NLP to identify AEs and signals of disproportionate reporting 
(SDR) in patient-generated SM. We also examined the performance of lift in 
SM-based signal detection (SD).
METHODS: Our examination was performed in a corpus of SM posts crawled from open 
online patient forums and communities, using the spontaneously reported VigiBase 
data as reference data set.
RESULTS: We found that co-occurrence and NLP produce AEs, which are 57% and 93% 
consistent with VigiBase AEs, respectively. Among the SDRs identified both in SM 
and in VigiBase, up to 55.3% were identified earlier in co-occurrence, and up to 
32.1% were identified earlier in NLP-processed SM. Using lift in SM SD provided 
performance similar to frequentist methods, both in co-occurrence and in 
NLP-processed AEs.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that using SM as a data source complementary to 
traditional pharmacovigilance sources should be considered further. Various 
levels of SM processing may be considered, depending on the preferred policies 
and tolerance for false-positive to false-negative balance in routine 
pharmacovigilance processes.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.4857
PMID: 31392844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Jul 5;14(7):1410. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14071410.

Drug-Drug Interactions with Oral Anticoagulants as Potentially Inappropriate 
Medications: Prevalence and Outcomes in Elderly Patients in Primary Care and 
Hospital Settings.

Bories M(1)(2)(3), Bouzillé G(2), Cuggia M(2), Le Corre P(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pôle Pharmacie, Service Hospitalo-Universitaire de Pharmacie, CHU de Rennes, 
35033 Rennes, France.
(2)CHU Rennes, INSERM, LTSI-UMR 1099, Univ Rennes, 35000 Rennes, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Biopharmacie et Pharmacie Clinique, Faculté de Pharmacie, 
Université de Rennes 1, 35043 Rennes, France.
(4)CHU Rennes, INSERM, EHESP, Irset (Institut de Recherche en Santé, 
Environnement et Travail)-UMR_S 1085, Univ Rennes, 35000 Rennes, France.

Direct oral anticoagulants and vitamin K antagonists are considered as 
potentially inappropriate medications (PIM) in several situations according to 
Beers Criteria. Drug-drug interactions (DDI) occurring specifically with these 
oral anticoagulants considered PIM (PIM-DDI) is an issue since it could enhance 
their inappropriate character and lead to adverse drug events, such as bleeding 
events. The aim of this study was (1) to describe the prevalence of oral 
anticoagulants as PIM, DDI and PIM-DDI in elderly patients in primary care and 
during hospitalization and (2) to evaluate their potential impact on the 
clinical outcomes by predicting hospitalization for bleeding events using 
machine learning methods. This retrospective study based on the linkage between 
a primary care database and a hospital data warehouse allowed us to display the 
oral anticoagulant treatment pathway. The prevalence of PIM was similar between 
primary care and hospital setting (22.9% and 20.9%), whereas the prevalence of 
DDI and PIM-DDI were slightly higher during hospitalization (47.2% vs. 58.9% and 
19.5% vs. 23.5%). Concerning mechanisms, combined with CYP3A4-P-gp interactions 
as PIM-DDI, were among the most prevalent in patients with bleeding events. 
Although PIM, DDI and PIM-DDI did not appeared as major predictors of bleeding 
events, they should be considered since they are the only factors that can be 
optimized by pharmacist and clinicians.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14071410
PMCID: PMC9325322
PMID: 35890305

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


242. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2020 May;188:105307. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105307. Epub 2019 Dec 27.

Comparison of the predictive outcomes for anti-tuberculosis drug-induced 
hepatotoxicity by different machine learning techniques.

Lai NH(1), Shen WC(1), Lee CN(2), Chang JC(1), Hsu MC(3), Kuo LN(4), Yu MC(5), 
Chen HY(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: shawn@tmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: The study compared the predictive outcomes of artificial neural 
network, support vector machine and random forest on the occurrence of 
anti-tuberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity.
METHODS: The clinical and genomic data of patients treated with 
anti-tuberculosis drugs at Taipei Medical University-Wanfang Hospital were used 
as training sets, and those at Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital 
served as test sets. Features were selected through a univariate risk factor 
analysis and literature evaluation. The accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and 
the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve were calculated to 
compare the traditional, genomic, and combined models of the three techniques.
RESULTS: Nine models were created with 7 clinical factors and 4 genotypes. 
Artificial neural network with clinical and genomic factors exhibited the best 
performance, with an accuracy of 88.67%, a sensitivity of 80%, and a specificity 
of 90.4% for the test set. The area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve of this best model reached 0.894 for training set and 0.898 for test set, 
which was significantly better than 0.801 for training set and 0.728 for test 
set by support vector machine and 0.724 for training set and 0.718 for test set 
by random forest.
CONCLUSIONS: Artificial neural network with clinical and genomic data can become 
a clinical useful tool in predicting anti-tuberculosis drug-induced 
hepatotoxicity. The machine learning technique can be an innovation to predict 
and prevent adverse drug reaction.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105307
PMID: 31911332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
bear all responsibility and have no conflicts of interest to declare.


243. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Jun;221:106839. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106839. Epub 2022 Apr 26.

How platinum-induced nephrotoxicity occurs? Machine learning prediction in 
non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Huang SH(1), Chu CY(1), Hsu YC(2), Wang SY(3), Kuo LN(4), Bai KJ(5), Yu MC(5), 
Chang JH(6), Liu EH(5), Chen HY(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, 
Taipei Medical University, No. 250 Wuxing St., Xinyi Dist., Taipei 11031, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Care and Health Systems, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota- Twin Cities, United States.
(3)Master Program in Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, College 
of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, 
Taipei Medical University, No. 250 Wuxing St., Xinyi Dist., Taipei 11031, 
Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)School of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Pulmonary Research Center, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, 
Taipei Medical University, No. 250 Wuxing St., Xinyi Dist., Taipei 11031, 
Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: shawn@tmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Platinum-induced nephrotoxicity is a severe and 
unexpected adverse drug reaction that could lead to treatment failure in 
non-small cell lung cancer patients. Better prediction and management of this 
nephrotoxicity can increase patient survival. Our study aimed to build up and 
compare the best machine learning models with clinical and genomic features to 
predict platinum-induced nephrotoxicity in non-small cell lung cancer patients.
METHODS: Clinical and genomic data of patients undergoing platinum chemotherapy 
at Wan Fang Hospital were collected after they were recruited. Twelve models 
were established by artificial neural network, logistic regression, random 
forest, and support vector machine with integrated, clinical, and genomic modes. 
Grid search and genetic algorithm were applied to construct the fine-tuned model 
with the best combination of predictive hyperparameters and features. Accuracy, 
precision, recall, F1 score, and area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve were calculated to compare the performance of the 12 
models.
RESULTS: In total, 118 patients were recruited for this study, among which 28 
(23.73%) were experiencing nephrotoxicity. Machine learning models with clinical 
and genomic features achieved better prediction performances than clinical or 
genomic features alone. Artificial neural network with clinical and genomic 
features demonstrated the best predictive outcomes among all 12 models. The 
average accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score and area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of the artificial neural network with integrated 
mode were 0.923, 0.950, 0.713, 0.808 and 0.900, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning models with clinical and genomic features can be a 
preliminary tool for oncologists to predict platinum-induced nephrotoxicity and 
provide preventive strategies in advance.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106839
PMID: 35550456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None declared.


244. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Mar 10;23(2):bbab580. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab580.

ADENet: a novel network-based inference method for prediction of drug adverse 
events.

Yu Z(1), Wu Z(1), Li W(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Optogenetic Techniques for Cell 
Metabolism, School of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and Technology, 
130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China.

Identification of adverse drug events (ADEs) is crucial to reduce human health 
risks and improve drug safety assessment. With an increasing number of 
biological and medical data, computational methods such as network-based methods 
were proposed for ADE prediction with high efficiency and low cost. However, 
previous network-based methods rely on the topological information of known 
drug-ADE networks, and hence cannot make predictions for novel compounds without 
any known ADE. In this study, we introduced chemical substructures to bridge the 
gap between the drug-ADE network and novel compounds, and developed a novel 
network-based method named ADENet, which can predict potential ADEs for not only 
drugs within the drug-ADE network, but also novel compounds outside the network. 
To show the performance of ADENet, we collected drug-ADE associations from a 
comprehensive database named MetaADEDB and constructed a series of network-based 
prediction models. These models obtained high area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve values ranging from 0.871 to 0.947 in 10-fold 
cross-validation. The best model further showed high performance in external 
validation, which outperformed a previous network-based and a recent deep 
learning-based method. Using several approved drugs as case studies, we found 
that 32-54% of the predicted ADEs can be validated by the literature, indicating 
the practical value of ADENet. Moreover, ADENet is freely available at our web 
server named NetInfer (http://lmmd.ecust.edu.cn/netinfer). In summary, our 
method would provide a promising tool for ADE prediction and drug safety 
assessment in drug discovery and development.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab580
PMID: 35039845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):521-533. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01160-9. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Identifying and Mitigating Potential Biases in Predicting Drug Approvals.

Xu Q(1)(2), Ahmadi E(3)(4), Amini A(3)(4), Rus D(3)(4), Lo AW(5)(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)MIT Operations Research Center, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(4)MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(5)MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
alo-admin@mit.edu.
(6)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. alo-admin@mit.edu.
(7)MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. alo-admin@mit.edu.
(8)MIT Operations Research Center, Cambridge, MA, USA. alo-admin@mit.edu.
(9)Sante Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA. alo-admin@mit.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Machine learning models are increasingly applied to predict the 
drug development outcomes based on intermediary clinical trial results. A key 
challenge to this task is to address various forms of bias in the historical 
drug approval data.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify and mitigate the bias in drug approval 
predictions and quantify the impacts of debiasing in terms of financial value 
and drug safety.
METHODS: We instantiated the Debiasing Variational Autoencoder, the 
state-of-the-art model for automated debiasing. We trained and evaluated the 
model on the Citeline dataset provided by Informa Pharma Intelligence to predict 
the final drug development outcome from phase II trial results.
RESULTS: The debiased Debiasing Variational Autoencoder model achieved better 
performance (measured by the [Formula: see text] score 0.48) in predicting the 
drug development outcomes than its un-debiased baseline ([Formula: see text] 
score 0.25). It had a much higher true-positive rate than baseline (60% vs 15%), 
while its true-negative rate was slightly lower (88% vs 99%). The Debiasing 
Variational Autoencoder distinguished between drugs developed by large 
pharmaceutical firms and those by small biotech companies. The model prediction 
is strongly influenced by multiple factors such as prior approval of the drug 
for another indication, whether the trial meets the positive/negative endpoints, 
and the year when the trial is completed. We estimate that the debiased model 
generates financial value for the drug developer in six major therapeutic areas, 
with a range of US$763-1,365 million.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that debiasing improves the financial efficiency 
of late-stage drug development. From the pharmacovigilance perspective, the 
debiased model is more likely to identify drugs that are both safe and 
effective. Meanwhile, it may predict a higher probability of success for drugs 
with potential adverse effects (because of its lower true-negative rate), thus 
it must be used with caution to predict the development outcomes of drug 
candidates currently in the pipeline.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01160-9
PMID: 35579815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2016 Jul 21;16 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):71. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-016-0311-6.

Learning temporal weights of clinical events using variable importance.

Zhao J(1), Henriksson A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, 
Borgarfjordsgatan 12, Kista, SE-16407, Sweden. jingzhao@dsv.su.se.
(2)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, 
Borgarfjordsgatan 12, Kista, SE-16407, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Longitudinal data sources, such as electronic health records (EHRs), 
are very valuable for monitoring adverse drug events (ADEs). However, ADEs are 
heavily under-reported in EHRs. Using machine learning algorithms to 
automatically detect patients that should have had ADEs reported in their health 
records is an efficient and effective solution. One of the challenges to that 
end is how to take into account the temporality of clinical events, which are 
time stamped in EHRs, and providing these as features for machine learning 
algorithms to exploit. Previous research on this topic suggests that 
representing EHR data as a bag of temporally weighted clinical events is 
promising; however, the weights were in that case pre-assigned according to 
their time stamps, which is limited and potentially less accurate. This study 
therefore focuses on how to learn weights that effectively take into account the 
temporality and importance of clinical events for ADE detection.
METHODS: Variable importance obtained from the random forest learning algorithm 
is used for extracting temporal weights. Two strategies are proposed for 
applying the learned weights: weighted aggregation and weighted sampling. The 
first strategy aggregates the weighted clinical events from different time 
windows to form new features; the second strategy retains the original features 
but samples them by using their weights as probabilities when building each tree 
in the forest. The predictive performance of random forest models using the 
learned weights with the two strategies is compared to using pre-assigned 
weights. In addition, to assess the sensitivity of the weight-learning 
procedure, weights from different granularity levels are evaluated and compared.
RESULTS: In the weighted sampling strategy, using learned weights significantly 
improves the predictive performance, in comparison to using pre-assigned 
weights; however, there is no significant difference between them in the 
weighted aggregation strategy. Moreover, the granularity of the weight learning 
procedure has a significant impact on the former, but not on the latter.
CONCLUSIONS: Learning temporal weights is significantly beneficial in terms of 
predictive performance with the weighted sampling strategy. Moreover, weighted 
aggregation generally diminishes the impact of temporal weighting of the 
clinical events, irrespective of whether the weights are pre-assigned or 
learned.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-016-0311-6
PMCID: PMC4965710
PMID: 27459993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1939:255-272. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9089-4_14.

Big Data Cohort Extraction for Personalized Statin Treatment and Machine 
Learning.

Adam TJ(1), Chi CL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Care and Health Systems, Health Informatics, 
Social and Administrative Pharmacy, University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA. adamx004@umn.edu.
(2)University of Minnesota School of Nursing, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

The creation of big clinical data cohorts for machine learning and data analysis 
require a number of steps from the beginning to successful completion. Similar 
to data set preprocessing in other fields, there is an initial need to complete 
data quality evaluation; however, with large heterogeneous clinical data sets, 
it is important to standardize the data in order to facilitate dimensionality 
reduction. This is particularly important for clinical data sets including 
medications as a core data component due to the complexity of coded medication 
data. Data integration at the individual subject level is essential with 
medication-related machine learning applications since it can be difficult to 
accurately identify drug exposures, therapeutic effects, and adverse drug events 
without having high-quality data integration of insurance, medication, and 
medical data. Successful data integration and standardization efforts can 
substantially improve the ability to identify and replicate personalized 
treatment pathways to optimize drug therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9089-4_14
PMID: 30848466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 May 2;14(5):429. doi: 10.3390/ph14050429.

Cold-Start Problems in Data-Driven Prediction of Drug-Drug Interaction Effects.

Dewulf P(1), Stock M(1), De Baets B(1).

Author information:
(1)KERMIT, Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modelling, Ghent 
University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Gent, Belgium.

Combining drugs, a phenomenon often referred to as polypharmacy, can induce 
additional adverse effects. The identification of adverse combinations is a key 
task in pharmacovigilance. In this context, in silico approaches based on 
machine learning are promising as they can learn from a limited number of 
combinations to predict for all. In this work, we identify various subtasks in 
predicting effects caused by drug-drug interaction. Predicting drug-drug 
interaction effects for drugs that already exist is very different from 
predicting outcomes for newly developed drugs, commonly called a cold-start 
problem. We propose suitable validation schemes for the different subtasks that 
emerge. These validation schemes are critical to correctly assess the 
performance. We develop a new model that obtains AUC-ROC =0.843 for the hardest 
cold-start task up to AUC-ROC =0.957 for the easiest one on the benchmark 
dataset of Zitnik et al. Finally, we illustrate how our predictions can be used 
to improve post-market surveillance systems or detect drug-drug interaction 
effects earlier during drug development.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14050429
PMCID: PMC8147651
PMID: 34063324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


249. Lancet Digit Health. 2022 Feb;4(2):e137-e148. doi: 
10.1016/S2589-7500(21)00229-6. Epub 2021 Nov 23.

Key use cases for artificial intelligence to reduce the frequency of adverse 
drug events: a scoping review.

Syrowatka A(1), Song W(2), Amato MG(3), Foer D(4), Edrees H(3), Co Z(5), 
Kuznetsova M(6), Dulgarian S(5), Seger DL(5), Simona A(2), Bain PA(7), Purcell 
Jackson G(8), Rhee K(9), Bates DW(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: asyrowatka@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA; Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA; Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(6)Harvard Business School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Countway Library of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Pediatric Surgery, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(9)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA; CVS Health, Wellesley Hills, MA, USA.
(10)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 
Harvard T H Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Adverse drug events (ADEs) represent one of the most prevalent types of 
health-care-related harm, and there is substantial room for improvement in the 
way that they are currently predicted and detected. We conducted a scoping 
review to identify key use cases in which artificial intelligence (AI) could be 
leveraged to reduce the frequency of ADEs. We focused on modern machine learning 
techniques and natural language processing. 78 articles were included in the 
scoping review. Studies were heterogeneous and applied various AI techniques 
covering a wide range of medications and ADEs. We identified several key use 
cases in which AI could contribute to reducing the frequency and consequences of 
ADEs, through prediction to prevent ADEs and early detection to mitigate the 
effects. Most studies (73 [94%] of 78) assessed technical algorithm performance, 
and few studies evaluated the use of AI in clinical settings. Most articles (58 
[74%] of 78) were published within the past 5 years, highlighting an emerging 
area of study. Availability of new types of data, such as genetic information, 
and access to unstructured clinical notes might further advance the field.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2589-7500(21)00229-6
PMID: 34836823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests ASy, WS, MGA, DF, HE, 
ZC, SD, and DWB received salary support from a grant funded by IBM Watson 
Health. DWB has received research support and consults for EarlySense, which 
makes patient safety monitoring systems. He receives cash compensation from CDI 
(Negev), which is a not-for-profit incubator for health IT startups. He receives 
equity from Valera Health, which makes software to help patients with chronic 
diseases, Clew, which makes software to support clinical decision making in 
intensive care, and MDClone, which takes clinical data and produces deidentified 
versions of it. He consults for and receives equity from AESOP, which makes 
software to reduce medication error rates, and FeelBetter. He has received 
research support from MedAware. GPJ is employed by IBM Watson Health, and her 
compensation includes salary and equity. KR was employed by IBM Watson Health, 
and is employed by CVS Health; his compensation from both IBM and CVS Health 
includes salary and equity. All other authors declare no competing interests.


250. Toxicol Sci. 2022 Aug 25;189(1):20-31. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfac062.

Potential Biomarker Identification by RNA-Seq Analysis in Antibiotic-Related 
Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS): A Pilot Study.

Teo YX(1)(2), Haw WY(1), Vallejo A(1), McGuire C(1), Woo J(1), Friedmann PS(1), 
Polak ME(1), Ardern-Jones MR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Southampton General Hospital, University Hospitals 
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.

One of the most severe forms of cutaneous adverse drug reactions is "drug 
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms" (DRESS), hence subsequent 
avoidance of the causal drug is imperative. However, attribution of drug 
culpability in DRESS is challenging and standard skin allergy tests are not 
recommended due to patient safety reasons. Whilst incidence of DRESS is 
relatively low, between 1:1000 and 1:10 000 drug exposures, antibiotics are a 
commoner cause of DRESS and absence of confirmatory diagnostic test can result 
in unnecessary avoidance of efficacious treatment. We therefore sought to 
identify potential biomarkers for development of a diagnostic test in 
antibiotic-associated DRESS. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a 
"discovery" cohort (n = 5) challenged to causative antibiotic or control were 
analyzed for transcriptomic profile. A panel of genes was then tested in a 
validation cohort (n = 6) and compared with tolerant controls and other 
inflammatory conditions which can clinically mimic DRESS. A scoring system to 
identify presence of drug hypersensitivity was developed based on gene 
expression alterations of this panel. The DRESS transcriptomic panel identified 
antibiotic-DRESS cases in a validation cohort but was not altered in other 
inflammatory conditions. Machine learning or differential expression selection 
of a biomarker panel consisting of 6 genes (STAC, GPR183, CD40, CISH, CD4, and 
CCL8) showed high sensitivity and specificity (100% and 85.7%-100%, 
respectively) for identification of the culprit drug in these cohorts of 
antibiotic-associated DRESS. Further work is required to determine whether the 
same panel can be repeated for larger cohorts, different medications, and other 
T-cell-mediated drug hypersensitivity reactions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfac062
PMCID: PMC9412178
PMID: 35703984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Bioinformatics. 2022 Aug 5:btac543. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac543. Online 
ahead of print.

Neural Collective Matrix Factorization for Integrated Analysis of Heterogeneous 
Biomedical Data.

Mariappan R(1), Jayagopal A(1), Sien HZ(1), Rajan V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Systems and Analytics, School of Computing, 
National University of Singapore.

MOTIVATION: In many biomedical studies, there arises the need to integrate data 
from multiple directly or indirectly related sources. Collective matrix 
factorization (CMF) and its variants are models designed to collectively learn 
from arbitrary collections of matrices. The latent factors learnt are rich 
integrative representations that can be used in downstream tasks such as 
clustering or relation prediction with standard machine learning models. 
Previous CMF-based methods have numerous modeling limitations. They do not 
adequately capture complex non-linear interactions and do not explicitly model 
varying sparsity and noise levels in the inputs, and some cannot model inputs 
with multiple datatypes. These inadequacies limit their use on many biomedical 
datasets.
RESULTS: To address these limitations, we develop Neural Collective Matrix 
Factorization (NCMF), the first fully neural approach to CMF. We evaluate NCMF 
on relation prediction tasks of gene-disease association prediction and adverse 
drug event prediction, using multiple datasets. In each case, data is obtained 
from heterogeneous publicly available databases, and used to learn 
representations to build predictive models. NCMF is found to outperform previous 
CMF-based methods and several state-of-the-art graph embedding methods for 
representation learning in our experiments. Our experiments illustrate the 
versatility and efficacy of NCMF in representation learning for seamless 
integration of heterogeneous data.
AVAILABILITY: https://github.com/ajayago/NCMF_bioinformatics.

© The Author(s) (2022). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights 
reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac543
PMID: 35929808


252. J Healthc Inform Res. 2018 Apr 12;2(1-2):25-43. doi: 10.1007/s41666-018-0018-9. 
eCollection 2018 Jun.

Detecting Adverse Drug Reactions on Twitter with Convolutional Neural Networks 
and Word Embedding Features.

Masino AJ(1), Forsyth D(1), Fiks AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19146 USA.

Motivated by limitations of adverse drug reaction (ADR) detection in clinical 
trials and passive post-market drug safety surveillance systems, a number of 
researchers have examined social media data as a potential ADR information 
source. Twitter is a particularly attractive platform because it has a large, 
diverse user community. Two challenges faced in applying Twitter data are that 
ADR descriptions are infrequent relative to the overall number of user posts and 
human review of all posts is impractical. To address these challenges, we framed 
the ADR detection problem as a binary classification task, where our objective 
was to develop a computational method that can classify user posts, known as 
tweets, relative to the presence of an ADR description. We developed a 
convolutional neural network model (ConvNet) that processes tweets as 
represented by word vectors created using unsupervised learning on large 
datasets. The ConvNet model achieved an F1-score of 0.46 and sensitivity of 0.78 
for tweet ADR classification on the test dataset, compared to 0.37 F1-score and 
0.33 sensitivity obtained by two baseline support vector machine (SVM) models 
that incorporated word embedding, n-gram, and lexicon features. We attribute the 
superior ConvNet model performance to its ability to process arbitrary length 
inputs, which allows it to evaluate every word embedding in a given tweet and 
make better use of their semantic content as compared to the SVM models which 
require a fixed length, aggregated embedding input. The results presented 
demonstrate the feasibility of detection of infrequent ADR mentions in 
large-scale media data.

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018.

DOI: 10.1007/s41666-018-0018-9
PMCID: PMC8982795
PMID: 35415401

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestsAGF received an independent 
research grant from Pfizer, which provided salary support for his research team 
for work unrelated to this project.


253. BMC Med Genomics. 2016 Aug 10;9 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):48. doi: 
10.1186/s12920-016-0207-4.

DL-ADR: a novel deep learning model for classifying genomic variants into 
adverse drug reactions.

Liang Z(1), Huang JX(2), Zeng X(3), Zhang G(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Technology, York University, Toronto, ON, M3J1P3, 
Canada.
(2)School of Information Technology, York University, Toronto, ON, M3J1P3, 
Canada. jhuang@yorku.ca.
(3)Second School of Clinic Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, 510120, China. zengxing-china@163.com.
(4)School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Genomic variations are associated with the metabolism and the 
occurrence of adverse reactions of many therapeutic agents. The polymorphisms on 
over 2000 locations of cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP) due to many factors such as 
ethnicity, mutations, and inheritance attribute to the diversity of response and 
side effects of various drugs. The associations of the single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), the internal pharmacokinetic patterns and the 
vulnerability of specific adverse reactions become one of the research interests 
of pharmacogenomics. The conventional genomewide association studies (GWAS) 
mainly focuses on the relation of single or multiple SNPs to a specific risk 
factors which are a one-to-many relation. However, there are no robust methods 
to establish a many-to-many network which can combine the direct and indirect 
associations between multiple SNPs and a serial of events (e.g. adverse 
reactions, metabolic patterns, prognostic factors etc.). In this paper, we 
present a novel deep learning model based on generative stochastic networks and 
hidden Markov chain to classify the observed samples with SNPs on five loci of 
two genes (CYP2D6 and CYP1A2) respectively to the vulnerable population of 14 
types of adverse reactions.
METHODS: A supervised deep learning model is proposed in this study. The revised 
generative stochastic networks (GSN) model with transited by the hidden Markov 
chain is used. The data of the training set are collected from clinical 
observation. The training set is composed of 83 observations of blood samples 
with the genotypes respectively on CYP2D6*2, *10, *14 and CYP1A2*1C, *1 F. The 
samples are genotyped by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. A hidden 
Markov chain is used as the transition operator to simulate the probabilistic 
distribution. The model can perform learning at lower cost compared to the 
conventional maximal likelihood method because the transition distribution is 
conditional on the previous state of the hidden Markov chain. A least square 
loss (LASSO) algorithm and a k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm are used as the 
baselines for comparison and to evaluate the performance of our proposed deep 
learning model.
RESULTS: There are 53 adverse reactions reported during the observation. They 
are assigned to 14 categories. In the comparison of classification accuracy, the 
deep learning model shows superiority over the LASSO and kNN model with a rate 
over 80 %. In the comparison of reliability, the deep learning model shows the 
best stability among the three models.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning provides a new method to explore the complex 
associations among genomic variations and multiple events in pharmacogenomics 
studies. The new deep learning algorithm is capable of classifying various SNPs 
to the corresponding adverse reactions. We expect that as more genomic 
variations are added as features and more observations are made, the deep 
learning model can improve its performance and can act as a black-box but 
reliable verifier for other GWAS studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-016-0207-4
PMCID: PMC4980789
PMID: 27510822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Apr 21;19:2318-2328. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.035. eCollection 2021.

Identification of the key target profiles underlying the drugs of narrow 
therapeutic index for treating cancer and cardiovascular disease.

Yin J(1), Li X(1), Li F(1), Lu Y(1), Zeng S(1)(2), Zhu F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, 
China.
(2)Innovation Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine of Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310018, China.
(3)Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Center of Future Digital 
Healthcare, Hangzhou 330110, China.

An appropriate therapeutic index is crucial for drug discovery and development 
since narrow therapeutic index (NTI) drugs with slight dosage variation may 
induce severe adverse drug reactions or potential treatment failure. To date, 
the shared characteristics underlying the targets of NTI drugs have been 
explored by several studies, which have been applied to identify potential drug 
targets. However, the association between the drug therapeutic index and the 
related disease has not been dissected, which is important for revealing the NTI 
drug mechanism and optimizing drug design. Therefore, in this study, two classes 
of disease (cancers and cardiovascular disorders) with the largest number of NTI 
drugs were selected, and the target property of the corresponding NTI drugs was 
analyzed. By calculating the biological system profiles and human 
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network properties of drug targets and 
adopting an AI-based algorithm, differentiated features between two diseases 
were discovered to reveal the distinct underlying mechanisms of NTI drugs in 
different diseases. Consequently, ten shared features and four unique features 
were identified for both diseases to distinguish NTI from NNTI drug targets. 
These computational discoveries, as well as the newly found features, suggest 
that in the clinical study of avoiding narrow therapeutic index in those 
diseases, the ability of target to be a hub and the efficiency of target 
signaling in the human PPI network should be considered, and it could thus 
provide novel guidance in the drug discovery and clinical research process and 
help to estimate the drug safety of cancer and cardiovascular disease.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.035
PMCID: PMC8105181
PMID: 33995923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


255. Indian J Pharmacol. 2019 Nov-Dec;51(6):373-376. doi: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_814_19. 
Epub 2020 Jan 16.

Artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance: Practical utility.

Murali K(1), Kaur S(2), Prakash A(2), Medhi B(2).

Author information:
(1)ADR Monitoring Center, PvPI, Department of Pharmacology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, 
India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.

DOI: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_814_19
PMCID: PMC6984023
PMID: 32029958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Clin Ther. 2021 Feb;43(2):372-379. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.12.014. Epub 
2021 Jan 18.

Artificial Intelligence in Pharmacovigilance: Scoping Points to Consider.

Hauben M(1), Hartford CG(2).

Author information:
(1)Safety Sciences Research, Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA; Department of 
Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Pharmaceutical Physician, Kent, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
craighartford.1@outlook.com.

Artificial intelligence (AI), a highly interdisciplinary science, is an 
increasing presence in pharmacovigilance (PV). A better understanding of the 
scope of artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance (AIPV) may be advantageous 
to more sharply defining, for example, which terms, methods, tasks, and data 
sets are suitably subsumed under the application of AIPV. Accordingly, this 
article explores relevant points to consider regarding defining the scope of 
AIPV and offers a potential working definition of the scope of AIPV.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2020.12.014
PMID: 33478803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2022 Jul-Aug;19(4):1968-1985. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2021.3081268. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

A Comprehensive Review of Computational Methods For Drug-Drug Interaction 
Detection.

Qiu Y, Zhang Y, Deng Y, Liu S, Zhang W.

The detection of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is a crucial task for drug safety 
surveillance, which provides effective and safe co-prescriptions of multiple 
drugs. Since laboratory researches are often complicated, costly and 
time-consuming, it's urgent to develop computational approaches to detect 
drug-drug interactions. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive review of 
state-of-the-art computational methods falling into three categories: 
literature-based extraction methods, machine learning-based prediction methods 
and pharmacovigilance-based data mining methods. Literature-based extraction 
methods detect DDIs from published literature using natural language processing 
techniques; machine learning-based prediction methods build prediction models 
based on the known DDIs in databases and predict novel ones; 
pharmacovigilance-based data mining methods usually apply statistical techniques 
on various electronic data to detect drug-drug interaction signals. We first 
present the taxonomy of drug-drug interaction detection methods and provide the 
outlines of three categories of methods. Afterwards, we respectively introduce 
research backgrounds and data sources of three categories, and illustrate their 
representative approaches as well as evaluation metrics. Finally, we discuss the 
current challenges of existing methods and highlight potential opportunities for 
future directions.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2021.3081268
PMID: 34003753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Sep 27;16(19):3628. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph16193628.

Ontology-Based Healthcare Named Entity Recognition from Twitter Messages Using a 
Recurrent Neural Network Approach.

Batbaatar E(1), Ryu KH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Chungbuk National University, 
Cheongju 28644, Korea.
(2)Faculty of Information Technology, Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi Minh City 
700000, Vietnam. khryu@tdtu.edu.vn.
(3)Database and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, 
College of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Chungbuk National University, 
Cheongju 28644, Korea. khryu@tdtu.edu.vn.

Named Entity Recognition (NER) in the healthcare domain involves identifying and 
categorizing disease, drugs, and symptoms for biosurveillance, extracting their 
related properties and activities, and identifying adverse drug events appearing 
in texts. These tasks are important challenges in healthcare. Analyzing user 
messages in social media networks such as Twitter can provide opportunities to 
detect and manage public health events. Twitter provides a broad range of short 
messages that contain interesting information for information extraction. In 
this paper, we present a Health-Related Named Entity Recognition (HNER) task 
using healthcare-domain ontology that can recognize health-related entities from 
large numbers of user messages from Twitter. For this task, we employ a deep 
learning architecture which is based on a recurrent neural network (RNN) with 
little feature engineering. To achieve our goal, we collected a large number of 
Twitter messages containing health-related information, and detected biomedical 
entities from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). A bidirectional long 
short-term memory (BiLSTM) model learned rich context information, and a 
convolutional neural network (CNN) was used to produce character-level features. 
The conditional random field (CRF) model predicted a sequence of labels that 
corresponded to a sequence of inputs, and the Viterbi algorithm was used to 
detect health-related entities from Twitter messages. We provide comprehensive 
results giving valuable insights for identifying medical entities in Twitter for 
various applications. The BiLSTM-CRF model achieved a precision of 93.99%, 
recall of 73.31%, and F1-score of 81.77% for disease or syndrome HNER; a 
precision of 90.83%, recall of 81.98%, and F1-score of 87.52% for sign or 
symptom HNER; and a precision of 94.85%, recall of 73.47%, and F1-score of 
84.51% for pharmacologic substance named entities. The ontology-based manual 
annotation results show that it is possible to perform high-quality annotation 
despite the complexity of medical terminology and the lack of context in tweets.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16193628
PMCID: PMC6801946
PMID: 31569654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


259. Drug Saf. 2021 Mar;44(3):261-272. doi: 10.1007/s40264-020-01030-2. Epub 2021 Feb 
1.

Validating Intelligent Automation Systems in Pharmacovigilance: Insights from 
Good Manufacturing Practices.

Huysentruyt K(1), Kjoersvik O(2), Dobracki P(3), Savage E(4), Mishalov E(5), 
Cherry M(6), Leonard E(7), Taylor R(8), Patel B(9), Abatemarco D(7).

Author information:
(1)Patient Safety, UCB, Brussels, Belgium. Kristof.Huysentruyt@ucb.com.
(2)R&D IT, MSD, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)RGITSC Software Validation, Roche Polska Sp. z o.o., Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Global Medical Organization, Janssen Research & Development, LLC a division 
of Johnson & Johnson, Horsham, PA, USA.
(5)PV Information Management, Astellas, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Information Technology, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, UK.
(7)WorldWide Patient Safety, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(8)Safety Management, Global Regulatory Affairs and, Merck & Co., Inc., 
Kenilworth, NJ, USA.
(9)Worldwide Safety, Pfizer Inc, Peapack, NJ, USA.

Pharmacovigilance is the science of monitoring the effects of medicinal products 
to identify and evaluate potential adverse reactions and provide necessary and 
timely risk mitigation measures. Intelligent automation technologies have a 
strong potential to automate routine work and to balance resource use across 
safety risk management and other pharmacovigilance activities. While emerging 
technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) show great promise for 
improving pharmacovigilance with their capability to learn based on data inputs, 
existing validation guidelines should be augmented to verify intelligent 
automation systems. While the underlying validation requirements largely remain 
the same, additional activities tailored to intelligent automation are needed to 
document evidence that the system is fit for purpose. We propose three 
categories of intelligent automation systems, ranging from rule-based systems to 
dynamic AI-based systems, and each category needs a unique validation approach. 
We expand on the existing good automated manufacturing practices, which outline 
a risk-based approach to artificially intelligent static systems. Our framework 
provides pharmacovigilance professionals with the knowledge to lead technology 
implementations within their organizations with considerations given to the 
building, implementation, validation, and maintenance of assistive technology 
systems. Successful pharmacovigilance professionals will play an increasingly 
active role in bridging the gap between business operations and technical 
advancements to ensure inspection readiness and compliance with global 
regulatory authorities.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-020-01030-2
PMCID: PMC7892696
PMID: 33523400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Kristof Huysentruyt is an employee and 
shareholder of UCB; Oeystein Kjoersvik is an employee of MSD, Czech Republic; 
Pawel Dobracki is an employee of Roche Products Limited; Elizabeth Savage is an 
employee of Janssen, the Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson; Ellen 
Mishalov is an employee of Astellas; Mark Cherry is an employee of AstraZeneca; 
Eileen Leonard is an employee of Bristol Myers Squibb; Robert Taylor is an 
employee of Merck & Co., Inc.; Bhavin Patel is an employee of Pfizer; and 
Danielle Abatemarco is an employee and shareholder of Bristol Myers Squibb.


260. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 21;264:45-49. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190180.

An Automated Detection System of Drug-Drug Interactions from Electronic Patient 
Records Using Big Data Analytics.

Bouzillé G(1), Morival C(2), Westerlynck R(3), Lemordant P(1), Chazard E(4), 
Lecorre P(2), Busnel Y(3), Cuggia M(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ Rennes, CHU Rennes, Inserm, LTSI - UMR 1099, F-35000 Rennes, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Pharmacie Galénique, Biopharmacie et Pharmacie Clinique, IRSET 
U1085, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de Rennes 1, F-35043, Rennes Cedex, 
France.
(3)IMT Atlantique, F-35576, Cesson-Sévigné, France.
(4)Univ Lille, CHU Lille, CERIM EA2694, F-59000 Lille, France.

The aim of the study was to build a proof-of-concept demonstratrating that big 
data technology could improve drug safety monitoring in a hospital and could 
help pharmacovigilance professionals to make data-driven targeted hypotheses on 
adverse drug events (ADEs) due to drug-drug interactions (DDI). We developed a 
DDI automatic detection system based on treatment data and laboratory tests from 
the electronic health records stored in the clinical data warehouse of Rennes 
academic hospital. We also used OrientDb, a graph database to store informations 
from five drug knowledge databases and Spark to perform analysis of potential 
interactions betweens drugs taken by hospitalized patients. Then, we developed a 
machine learning model to identify the patients in whom an ADE might have 
occurred because of a DDI. The DDI detection system worked efficiently and 
computation time was manageable. The system could be routinely employed for 
monitoring.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190180
PMID: 31437882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2015;15 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S1. doi: 
10.1186/1472-6947-15-S4-S1. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Predictive modeling of structured electronic health records for adverse drug 
event detection.

Zhao J, Henriksson A, Asker L, Boström H.

BACKGROUND: The digitization of healthcare data, resulting from the increasingly 
widespread adoption of electronic health records, has greatly facilitated its 
analysis by computational methods and thereby enabled large-scale secondary use 
thereof. This can be exploited to support public health activities such as 
pharmacovigilance, wherein the safety of drugs is monitored to inform regulatory 
decisions about sustained use. To that end, electronic health records have 
emerged as a potentially valuable data source, providing access to longitudinal 
observations of patient treatment and drug use. A nascent line of research 
concerns predictive modeling of healthcare data for the automatic detection of 
adverse drug events, which presents its own set of challenges: it is not yet 
clear how to represent the heterogeneous data types in a manner conducive to 
learning high-performing machine learning models.
METHODS: Datasets from an electronic health record database are used for 
learning predictive models with the purpose of detecting adverse drug events. 
The use and representation of two data types, as well as their combination, are 
studied: clinical codes, describing prescribed drugs and assigned diagnoses, and 
measurements. Feature selection is conducted on the various types of data to 
reduce dimensionality and sparsity, while allowing for an in-depth feature 
analysis of the usefulness of each data type and representation.
RESULTS: Within each data type, combining multiple representations yields better 
predictive performance compared to using any single representation. The use of 
clinical codes for adverse drug event detection significantly outperforms the 
use of measurements; however, there is no significant difference over datasets 
between using only clinical codes and their combination with measurements. For 
certain adverse drug events, the combination does, however, outperform using 
only clinical codes. Feature selection leads to increased predictive performance 
for both data types, in isolation and combined.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated how machine learning can be applied to 
electronic health records for the purpose of detecting adverse drug events and 
proposed solutions to some of the challenges this presents, including how to 
represent the various data types. Overall, clinical codes are more useful than 
measurements and, in specific cases, it is beneficial to combine the two.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-15-S4-S1
PMCID: PMC4660129
PMID: 26606038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biomed Inform. 2022 Aug;132:104122. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104122. Epub 2022 
Jun 24.

A knowledge graph embedding based approach to predict the adverse drug reactions 
using a deep neural network.

Joshi P(1), V M(2), Mukherjee A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Information Technology Design & Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, Chennai 600127, 
India. Electronic address: coe18d006@iiitdm.ac.in.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Information Technology Design & Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, Chennai 600127, 
India.
(3)Head of Research, Datafoundry AI, Bangalore, India.

Recently Artificial Intelligence(AI) has not only been used to diagnose the 
disease but also to cure the disease. Researchers started using AI for drug 
discovery. Predicting the Adverse Drug Reactions(ADRs) caused by the drug in the 
manufacturing stage or in the clinical trial stage is a very important problem 
in drug discovery. ADRs have become a major concern resulting in injuries and 
also becoming fatal sometimes. Drug safety has gained much importance over the 
years propelling to the forefront investigation of predicting the ADRs. Although 
prior studies have queried diverse approaches to predict ADRs, very few were 
found to be effective. Also, the problem of having fewer reports makes the 
prediction of ADRs more difficult. To tackle this problem effectively, a novel 
method has been proposed in this paper. The proposed method is based on 
Knowledge Graph(KG) embedding. Using the KG embedding, we designed and trained a 
custom-made Deep Neural Network(DNN) called KGDNN(Knowledge Graph DNN) for 
predicting the ADRs. A KG has been constructed with 6 types of entities: drugs, 
ADRs, target proteins, indications, pathways, and genes. Using the Node2Vec 
algorithm, each node has been embedded into a feature space. Using those 
embeddings, the ADRs are classified by the KGDNN model. The proposed method has 
obtained an AUROC score of 0.917 and significantly outperformed the existing 
methods. Two case studies on drugs causing liver injury and COVID-19 recommended 
drugs have been performed to illustrate the model efficacy.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104122
PMID: 35753606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 9;265:113-118. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190148.

Classification Scheme for Incident Reports of Medication Errors.

Shiima Y(1), Wong ZS(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Public Health, St. Luke's International University.

This study aimed to develop a classification scheme for retrieving information 
from incident reports of medication errors. This 15-category classification 
scheme captures minimal medication-incident related information from incident 
reports and thus serves as an information model for automatic information 
retrieval solution. The automatic solution uses recent advances in artificial 
intelligence methods to learn from incident report resources and is promising to 
the prevention of adverse drug events and promotion of safety in medical care.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190148
PMID: 31431586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Med Inform. 2019 May;125:30-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.005. Epub 
2019 Feb 12.

The effects of adverse drug reactions on patients' satisfaction: Evidence from 
publicly available data on Tamiflu (oseltamivir).

Antipov EA(1), Pokryshevskaya EB(2).

Author information:
(1)National Research University Higher School of Economics, Kantemirovskaya 3, 
Saint-Petersburg, 194100, Russia. Electronic address: eantipov@hse.ru.
(2)National Research University Higher School of Economics, Kantemirovskaya 3, 
Saint-Petersburg, 194100, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Despite the fact that user-generated data are widely used in medical 
informatics in general and for revealing side-effects of various pharmaceuticals 
in particular, recent studies have focused merely on methods of extracting 
information on side effects from unstructured or semi-structured reviews of 
specific medications without linking side effects to any outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: In this study we demonstrate how user-generated online content on 
side effects experienced by patients while taking a pharmaceutical product can 
be used to do research after the drug has been introduced to the market, thus 
allowing to complement the results of official clinical studies and market 
research. In particular, we concentrate on revealing the contribution of various 
side effects to reported customer satisfaction with Tamiflu, a popular antiviral 
drug.
METHODS: Publicly available data from an online platform with reviews from 
patients are used as an input to the analysis that applies statistical and 
machine learning methods (multivariate logit models and classification trees) to 
investigate the relationships of side effects to demographic characteristics and 
to the overall satisfaction with the medication.
RESULTS: We prioritized side effects of Tamiflu based on the significance of 
their association with patient's ratings published at one of the well-known drug 
discussion forums. Among all types of side effects used in our study, the 
neuropsychiatric symptoms and body pain are the most influential, followed by 
skin problems. Specific combinations of side-effects that are associated with 
low satisfaction were detected.
CONCLUSION: The proposed analytical approach can help pharmaceutical companies 
to improve their products and/or medical guidelines associated with their 
products and figure out fighting which adverse effects should be given a 
priority from the customer satisfaction perspective.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.005
PMID: 30914178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. JMIR Med Inform. 2018 Nov 26;6(4):e12159. doi: 10.2196/12159.

Extraction of Information Related to Adverse Drug Events from Electronic Health 
Record Notes: Design of an End-to-End Model Based on Deep Learning.

Li F(1)(2)(3), Liu W(1)(2)(3), Yu H(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
MA, United States.
(2)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Bedford 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, United States.
(4)School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacovigilance and drug-safety surveillance are crucial for 
monitoring adverse drug events (ADEs), but the main ADE-reporting systems such 
as Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System face challenges 
such as underreporting. Therefore, as complementary surveillance, data on ADEs 
are extracted from electronic health record (EHR) notes via natural language 
processing (NLP). As NLP develops, many up-to-date machine-learning techniques 
are introduced in this field, such as deep learning and multi-task learning 
(MTL). However, only a few studies have focused on employing such techniques to 
extract ADEs.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to design a deep learning model for extracting ADEs and 
related information such as medications and indications. Since extraction of 
ADE-related information includes two steps-named entity recognition and relation 
extraction-our second objective was to improve the deep learning model using 
multi-task learning between the two steps.
METHODS: We employed the dataset from the Medication, Indication and Adverse 
Drug Events (MADE) 1.0 challenge to train and test our models. This dataset 
consists of 1089 EHR notes of cancer patients and includes 9 entity types such 
as Medication, Indication, and ADE and 7 types of relations between these 
entities. To extract information from the dataset, we proposed a deep-learning 
model that uses a bidirectional long short-term memory (BiLSTM) conditional 
random field network to recognize entities and a BiLSTM-Attention network to 
extract relations. To further improve the deep-learning model, we employed three 
typical MTL methods, namely, hard parameter sharing, parameter regularization, 
and task relation learning, to build three MTL models, called HardMTL, RegMTL, 
and LearnMTL, respectively.
RESULTS: Since extraction of ADE-related information is a two-step task, the 
result of the second step (ie, relation extraction) was used to compare all 
models. We used microaveraged precision, recall, and F1 as evaluation metrics. 
Our deep learning model achieved state-of-the-art results (F1=65.9%), which is 
significantly higher than that (F1=61.7%) of the best system in the MADE1.0 
challenge. HardMTL further improved the F1 by 0.8%, boosting the F1 to 66.7%, 
whereas RegMTL and LearnMTL failed to boost the performance.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep learning models can significantly improve the performance of 
ADE-related information extraction. MTL may be effective for named entity 
recognition and relation extraction, but it depends on the methods, data, and 
other factors. Our results can facilitate research on ADE detection, NLP, and 
machine learning.

©Fei Li, Weisong Liu, Hong Yu. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 26.11.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/12159
PMCID: PMC6288593
PMID: 30478023

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


266. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Jul 12;23(7):e25049. doi: 10.2196/25049.

Assessing Patient Perceptions and Experiences of Paracetamol in France: 
Infodemiology Study Using Social Media Data Mining.

Schück S(1), Roustamal A(1), Gedik A(1), Voillot P(1), Foulquié P(1), Penfornis 
C(2), Job B(2).

Author information:
(1)Kap Code, Paris, France.
(2)Sanofi, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Individuals frequently turning to social media to discuss medical 
conditions and medication, sharing their experiences and information and asking 
questions among themselves. These online discussions can provide valuable 
insights into individual perceptions of medical treatment, and increasingly, 
studies are focusing on the potential use of this information to improve health 
care management.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this infodemiology study was to identify social 
media posts mentioning paracetamol-containing products to develop a better 
understanding of patients' opinions and perceptions of the drug.
METHODS: Posts between January 2003 and March 2019 containing at least one 
mention of paracetamol were extracted from 18 French forums in May 2019 with the 
use of the Detec't (Kap Code) web crawler. Posts were then analyzed using the 
automated Detec't tool, which uses machine learning and text mining methods to 
inspect social media posts and extract relevant content. Posts were classified 
into groups: Paracetamol Only, Paracetamol and Opioids, Paracetamol and Others, 
and the Aggregate group.
RESULTS: Overall, 44,283 posts were analyzed from 20,883 different users. Post 
volume over the study period showed a peak in activity between 2009 and 2012, as 
well as a spike in 2017 in the Aggregate group. The number of posts tended to be 
higher during winter each year. Posts were made predominantly by women 
(14,897/20,883, 71.34%), with 12.00% (2507/20,883) made by men and 16.67% 
(3479/20,883) by individuals of unknown gender. The mean age of web users was 39 
(SD 19) years. In the Aggregate group, pain was the most common medical concept 
discussed (22,257/37,863, 58.78%), and paracetamol risk was the most common 
discussion topic, addressed in 20.36% (8902/43,725) of posts. Doliprane was the 
most common medication mentioned (14,058/44,283, 31.74%) within the Aggregate 
group, and tramadol was the most commonly mentioned drug in combination with 
paracetamol in the Aggregate group (1038/19,587, 5.30%). The most common 
unapproved indication mentioned within the Paracetamol Only group was fatigue 
(190/616, with 16.32% positive for an unapproved indication), with reference to 
dependence made by 1.61% (136/8470) of the web users, accounting for 1.33% 
(171/12,843) of the posts in the Paracetamol Only group. Dependence mentions in 
the Paracetamol and Opioids group were provided by 6.94% (248/3576) of web 
users, accounting for 5.44% (342/6281) of total posts. Reference to overdose was 
made by 245 web users across 291 posts within the Paracetamol Only group. The 
most common potential adverse event detected was nausea (306/12843, 2.38%) 
within the Paracetamol Only group.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of social media mining with the Detec't tool provided 
valuable information on the perceptions and understanding of the web users, 
highlighting areas where providing more information for the general public on 
paracetamol, as well as other medications, may be of benefit.

©Stéphane Schück, Avesta Roustamal, Anaïs Gedik, Paméla Voillot, Pierre 
Foulquié, Catherine Penfornis, Bernard Job. Originally published in the Journal 
of Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 12.07.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/25049
PMCID: PMC8314157
PMID: 34255645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: SS, AG, PV, and PF are 
employees of Kap Code. AR was an employee of Kap Code at the time the study was 
completed. CP and BJ are Sanofi employees.


267. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Sep 14;75(5):743-752. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac003.

Whole-Blood 3-Gene Signature as a Decision Aid for Rifapentine-based 
Tuberculosis Preventive Therapy.

Huang HL(1)(2)(3)(4), Lee JY(5), Lo YS(5), Liu IH(5), Huang SH(5), Huang YW(5), 
Lee MR(6)(7), Lee CH(8), Cheng MH(1)(2)(4)(9), Lu PL(2)(4)(10), Wang JY(7), Yang 
JM(5)(11)(12), Chong IW(1)(2)(8)(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu 
Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Division of Pulmonary Medicine and Pulmonary Research Center, Wanfang 
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(10)Center for Liquid Biopsy and Cohort, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(11)Center for Intelligent Drug Systems and Smart Bio-devices, National Yang 
Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwanand.
(12)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Systemic drug reaction (SDR) is a major safety concern with weekly 
rifapentine plus isoniazid for 12 doses (3HP) for latent tuberculosis infection 
(LTBI). Identifying SDR predictors and at-risk participants before treatment can 
improve cost-effectiveness of the LTBI program.
METHODS: We prospectively recruited 187 cases receiving 3HP (44 SDRs and 143 
non-SDRs). A pilot cohort (8 SDRs and 12 non-SDRs) was selected for generating 
whole-blood transcriptomic data. By incorporating the hierarchical system 
biology model and therapy-biomarker pathway approach, candidate genes were 
selected and evaluated using reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR). Then, interpretable machine learning models presenting as 
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) values were applied for SDR risk 
prediction. Finally, an independent cohort was used to evaluate the performance 
of these predictive models.
RESULTS: Based on the whole-blood transcriptomic profile of the pilot cohort and 
the RT-qPCR results of 2 SDR and 3 non-SDR samples in the training cohort, 6 
genes were selected. According to SHAP values for model construction and 
validation, a 3-gene model for SDR risk prediction achieved a sensitivity and 
specificity of 0.972 and 0.947, respectively, under a universal cutoff value for 
the joint of the training (28 SDRs and 104 non-SDRs) and testing (8 SDRs and 27 
non-SDRs) cohorts. It also worked well across different subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: The prediction model for 3HP-related SDRs serves as a guide for 
establishing a safe and personalized regimen to foster the implementation of an 
LTBI program. Additionally, it provides a potential translational value for 
future studies on drug-related hypersensitivity.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciac003
PMCID: PMC9477448
PMID: 34989801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No 
reported conflicts of interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for 
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.


268. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2018 Jul 23;18(Suppl 2):60. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-018-0629-3.

Chemical-induced disease extraction via recurrent piecewise convolutional neural 
networks.

Li H(1)(2), Yang M(3), Chen Q(4)(5), Tang B(6)(7), Wang X(1)(2), Yan J(8).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation, Harbin Institute 
of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Calligraphy Digital Simulation Technology Engineering Laboratory, 
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Pharmacy Department, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, First Affiliated 
Hospital of Shenzhen University, Guandong, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation, Harbin Institute 
of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. qingcai.chen@gmail.com.
(5)Shenzhen Calligraphy Digital Simulation Technology Engineering Laboratory, 
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 
qingcai.chen@gmail.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation, Harbin Institute 
of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. tangbuzhou@gmail.com.
(7)Shenzhen Calligraphy Digital Simulation Technology Engineering Laboratory, 
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 
tangbuzhou@gmail.com.
(8)Yidu Cloud (Beijing) Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Extracting relationships between chemicals and diseases from 
unstructured literature have attracted plenty of attention since the 
relationships are very useful for a large number of biomedical applications such 
as drug repositioning and pharmacovigilance. A number of machine learning 
methods have been proposed for chemical-induced disease (CID) extraction due to 
some publicly available annotated corpora. Most of them suffer from 
time-consuming feature engineering except deep learning methods. In this paper, 
we propose a novel document-level deep learning method, called recurrent 
piecewise convolutional neural networks (RPCNN), for CID extraction.
RESULTS: Experimental results on a benchmark dataset, the CDR (Chemical-induced 
Disease Relation) dataset of the BioCreative V challenge for CID extraction show 
that the highest precision, recall and F-score of our RPCNN-based CID extraction 
system are 65.24, 77.21 and 70.77%, which is competitive with other 
state-of-the-art systems.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel deep learning method is proposed for document-level CID 
extraction, where domain knowledge, piecewise strategy, attention mechanism, and 
multi-instance learning are combined together. The effectiveness of the method 
is proved by experiments conducted on a benchmark dataset.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-018-0629-3
PMCID: PMC6069297
PMID: 30066652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


269. JMIR Med Inform. 2022 Sep 28;10(9):e38140. doi: 10.2196/38140.

An Assessment of Mentions of Adverse Drug Events on Social Media With Natural 
Language Processing: Model Development and Analysis.

Yu D(1), Vydiswaran VGV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(2)Department of Learning Health Sciences, Medical School, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.

BACKGROUND: Adverse reactions to drugs attract significant concern in both 
clinical practice and public health monitoring. Multiple measures have been put 
into place to increase postmarketing surveillance of the adverse effects of 
drugs and to improve drug safety. These measures include implementing 
spontaneous reporting systems and developing automated natural language 
processing systems based on data from electronic health records and social media 
to collect evidence of adverse drug events that can be further investigated as 
possible adverse reactions.
OBJECTIVE: While using social media for collecting evidence of adverse drug 
events has potential, it is not clear whether social media are a reliable source 
for this information. Our work aims to (1) develop natural language processing 
approaches to identify adverse drug events on social media and (2) assess the 
reliability of social media data to identify adverse drug events.
METHODS: We propose a collocated long short-term memory network model with 
attentive pooling and aggregated, contextual representation generated by a 
pretrained model. We applied this model on large-scale Twitter data to identify 
adverse drug event-related tweets. We conducted a qualitative content analysis 
of these tweets to validate the reliability of social media data as a means to 
collect such information.
RESULTS: The model outperformed a variant without contextual representation 
during both the validation and evaluation phases. Through the content analysis 
of adverse drug event tweets, we observed that adverse drug event-related 
discussions had 7 themes. Mental health-related, sleep-related, and pain-related 
adverse drug event discussions were most frequent. We also contrast known 
adverse drug reactions to those mentioned in tweets.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed a distinct improvement in the model when it used 
contextual information. However, our results reveal weak generalizability of the 
current systems to unseen data. Additional research is needed to fully utilize 
social media data and improve the robustness and reliability of natural language 
processing systems. The content analysis, on the other hand, showed that Twitter 
covered a sufficiently wide range of adverse drug events, as well as known 
adverse reactions, for the drugs mentioned in tweets. Our work demonstrates that 
social media can be a reliable data source for collecting adverse drug event 
mentions.

©Deahan Yu, V G Vinod Vydiswaran. Originally published in JMIR Medical 
Informatics (https://medinform.jmir.org), 28.09.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/38140
PMCID: PMC9557755
PMID: 36170004

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


270. Drug Saf. 2021 Nov;44(11):1165-1178. doi: 10.1007/s40264-021-01103-w. Epub 2021 
Oct 21.

Identifying Actionability as a Key Factor for the Adoption of 'Intelligent' 
Systems for Drug Safety: Lessons Learned from a User-Centred Design Approach.

Gavriilidis GI(1), Dimitriadis VK(1), Jaulent MC(2), Natsiavas P(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Biosciences, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, 
6th Km. Charilaou, Thermi Road, PO Box 60361, 57001, Thermi, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.
(2)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Univ Paris 13, Laboratoire d'Informatique 
Médicale et d'Ingénierie des Connaissances pour la e-Santé, LIMICS, 75006, 
Paris, France.
(3)Institute of Applied Biosciences, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, 
6th Km. Charilaou, Thermi Road, PO Box 60361, 57001, Thermi, Thessaloniki, 
Greece. pnatsiavas@certh.gr.
(4)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Univ Paris 13, Laboratoire d'Informatique 
Médicale et d'Ingénierie des Connaissances pour la e-Santé, LIMICS, 75006, 
Paris, France. pnatsiavas@certh.gr.

INTRODUCTION: Information technology (IT) plays an important role in the 
healthcare landscape via the increasing digitization of medical data and the use 
of modern computational paradigms such as machine learning (ML) and knowledge 
graphs (KGs). These 'intelligent' technical paradigms provide a new digital 
'toolkit' supporting drug safety and healthcare processes, including 'active 
pharmacovigilance'. While these technical paradigms are promising, intelligent 
systems (ISs) are not yet widely adopted by pharmacovigilance (PV) stakeholders, 
namely the pharma industry, academia/research community, drug safety monitoring 
organizations, regulatory authorities, and healthcare institutions. The 
limitations obscuring the integration of ISs into PV activities are 
multifaceted, involving technical, legal and medical hurdles, and thus require 
further elucidation.
OBJECTIVE: We dissect the abovementioned limitations by describing the lessons 
learned during the design and implementation of the PVClinical platform, a web 
platform aiming to support the investigation of potential adverse drug reactions 
(ADRs), emphasizing the use of knowledge engineering (KE) as its main technical 
paradigm.
RESULTS: To this end, we elaborate on the related 'business processes' (i.e. 
operational processes) and 'user goals' identified as part of the PVClinical 
platform design process based on Design Thinking principles. We also elaborate 
on key challenges restricting the adoption of such ISs and their integration in 
the clinical setting and beyond.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight the fact that beyond providing analytics and useful 
statistics to the end user, 'actionability' has emerged as the operational 
priority identified through the whole process. Furthermore, we focus on the 
needs for valid, reproducible, explainable and human-interpretable results, 
stressing the need to emphasize on usability.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-021-01103-w
PMCID: PMC8553681
PMID: 34674190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: George I. Gavriilidis, Vlasios K. Dimitriadis, 
Marie-Christine Jaulent and Pantelis Natsiavas have no conflicts of interest to 
report.


271. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2017 Jun;16(6):721-732. doi: 
10.1080/14740338.2017.1325463. Epub 2017 May 15.

Methods for safety signal detection in healthcare databases: a literature 
review.

Arnaud M(1)(2), Bégaud B(1)(2)(3), Thurin N(1)(2)(4), Moore N(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Pariente A(1)(2)(3)(4), Salvo F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a University of Bordeaux , Bordeaux , France.
(2)b Bordeaux Population Health Research Centre, Pharmacoepidemiology team , 
INSERM UMR1219 , Bordeaux , France.
(3)c CHU Bordeaux , Service de Pharmacologie Médicale , Bordeaux , France.
(4)d CIC Bordeaux.

With increasing availability, the use of healthcare databases as complementary 
data source for drug safety signal detection has been explored to circumvent the 
limitations inherent in spontaneous reporting. Areas covered: To review the 
methods proposed for safety signal detection in healthcare databases and their 
performance. Expert opinion: Fifteen different data mining methods were 
identified. They are based on disproportionality analysis, traditional 
pharmacoepidemiological designs (e.g. self-controlled designs), sequence 
symmetry analysis (SSA), sequential statistical testing, temporal association 
rules, supervised machine learning (SML), and the tree-based scan statistic. 
When considering the performance of these methods, the self-controlled designs, 
the SSA, and the SML seemed the most interesting approaches. In the perspective 
of routine signal detection from healthcare databases, pragmatic aspects such as 
the need for stakeholders to understand the method in order to be confident in 
the results must be considered. From this point of view, the SSA could appear as 
the most suitable method for signal detection in healthcare databases owing to 
its simple principle and its ability to provide a risk estimate. However, 
further developments, such as automated prioritization, are needed to help 
stakeholders handle the multiplicity of signals.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2017.1325463
PMID: 28490262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):511-519. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01170-7. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Artificial Intelligence-Based Pharmacovigilance in the Setting of Limited 
Resources.

Liang L(#)(1), Hu J(#)(2), Sun G(#)(3), Hong N(4), Wu G(4), He Y(4), Li Y(1), 
Hao T(1), Liu L(5), Gong M(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Oncology of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, The 
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Ürümqi, China.
(4)Digital Health China Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
(5)Institute of Health Management, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(6)Institute of Health Management, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China. gmc@nrdrs.org.
(#)Contributed equally

With the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, and the 
large amount of pharmacovigilance-related data stored in an electronic manner, 
data-driven automatic methods need to be urgently applied to all aspects of 
pharmacovigilance to assist healthcare professionals. However, the quantity and 
quality of data directly affect the performance of AI, and there are particular 
challenges to implementing AI in limited-resource settings. Analyzing challenges 
and solutions for AI-based pharmacovigilance in resource-limited settings can 
improve pharmacovigilance frameworks and capabilities in these settings. In this 
review, we summarize the challenges into four categories: establishing a 
database for an AI-based pharmacovigilance system, lack of human resources, weak 
AI technology and insufficient government support. This study also discusses 
possible solutions and future perspectives on AI-based pharmacovigilance in 
resource-limited settings.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01170-7
PMCID: PMC9112260
PMID: 35579814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


273. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2020 Mar 4;2019:1051-1060. eCollection 2019.

Leveraging Contextual Information in Extracting Long Distance Relations from 
Clinical Notes.

Guan H(1), Devarakonda M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics, College of Health Solutions Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ.

Relation extraction from biomedical text is important for clinical decision 
support applications. In post-marketing pharmacovigilance, for example, Adverse 
Drug Events (ADE) relate medical problems to the drugs that caused them and were 
the focus of two recent shared challenges. While good results were reported, 
there was a room for improvement. Here, we studied two new improved methods for 
relation extraction: (1) State-of-the-art deep learning contextual 
representation model called BERT, Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers; (2) Selection of negative training samples based on the 
"near-miss" hypothesis (the Edge sampling). We used the datasets from MADE and 
N2C2 Task-2 for performance evaluation. BERT and Edge together improved 
performance of ADE and Reason (indication) relations extraction by 6.4-6.7 
absolute percentage (and error rate reduction of 24%-28%). ADE and Reason 
relations contained longer text between the entities, which BERT and Edge were 
able to leverage to achieve the performance improvement. While the performance 
improvement for medication attribute relations was smaller in absolute 
percentages, error rate reduction was still considerable.

©2019 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC7153124
PMID: 32308902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2022 Jun 29;17(6):e0270327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270327. 
eCollection 2022.

Novel extreme regression-voting classifier to predict death risk in vaccinated 
people using VAERS data.

Saad E(1), Sadiq S(1), Jamil R(1), Rustam F(2), Mehmood A(3), Choi GS(4), Ashraf 
I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Khawaja Fareed University of Engineering and 
Information Technology, Rahim Yar Khan, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Software Engineering, School of Systems and Technology, 
University of Management and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Computer Science & Information Technology, The Islamia 
University of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
(4)Information and Communication Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, 
Korea.

COVID-19 vaccination raised serious concerns among the public and people are 
mind stuck by various rumors regarding the resulting illness, adverse reactions, 
and death. Such rumors are dangerous to the campaign against the COVID-19 and 
should be dealt with accordingly and timely. One prospective solution is to use 
machine learning-based models to predict the death risk for vaccinated people 
and clarify people's perceptions regarding death risk. This study focuses on the 
prediction of the death risks associated with vaccinated people followed by a 
second dose for two reasons; first to build consensus among people to get the 
vaccines; second, to reduce the fear regarding vaccines. Given that, this study 
utilizes the COVID-19 VAERS dataset that records adverse events after COVID-19 
vaccination as 'recovered', 'not recovered', and 'survived'. To obtain better 
prediction results, a novel voting classifier extreme regression-voting 
classifier (ER-VC) is introduced. ER-VC ensembles extra tree classifier and 
logistic regression using soft voting criterion. To avoid model overfitting and 
get better results, two data balancing techniques synthetic minority 
oversampling (SMOTE) and adaptive synthetic sampling (ADASYN) have been applied. 
Moreover, three feature extraction techniques term frequency-inverse document 
frequency (TF-IDF), bag of words (BoW), and global vectors (GloVe) have been 
used for comparison. Both machine learning and deep learning models are deployed 
for experiments. Results obtained from extensive experiments reveal that the 
proposed model in combination with TF-TDF has shown robust results with a 0.85 
accuracy when trained on the SMOTE-balanced dataset. In line with this, 
validation of the proposed voting classifier on binary classification shows 
state-of-the-art results with a 0.98 accuracy. Results show that machine 
learning models can predict the death risk with high accuracy and can assist the 
authors in taking timely measures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270327
PMCID: PMC9242465
PMID: 35767542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


275. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):429-438. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01157-4. Epub 2022 May 
17.

"Artificial Intelligence" for Pharmacovigilance: Ready for Prime Time?

Ball R(1), Dal Pan G(2).

Author information:
(1)US Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 
Robert.Ball@fda.hhs.gov.
(2)US Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Silver Spring, MD, USA.

There is great interest in the application of 'artificial intelligence' (AI) to 
pharmacovigilance (PV). Although US FDA is broadly exploring the use of AI for 
PV, we focus on the application of AI to the processing and evaluation of 
Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) submitted to the FDA Adverse Event 
Reporting System (FAERS). We describe a general framework for considering the 
readiness of AI for PV, followed by some examples of the application of AI to 
ICSR processing and evaluation in industry and FDA. We conclude that AI can 
usefully be applied to some aspects of ICSR processing and evaluation, but the 
performance of current AI algorithms requires a 'human-in-the-loop' to ensure 
good quality. We identify outstanding scientific and policy issues to be 
addressed before the full potential of AI can be exploited for ICSR processing 
and evaluation, including approaches to quality assurance of 'human-in-the-loop' 
AI systems, large-scale, publicly available training datasets, a well-defined 
and computable 'cognitive framework', a formal sociotechnical framework for 
applying AI to PV, and development of best practices for applying AI to PV. 
Practical experience with stepwise implementation of AI for ICSR processing and 
evaluation will likely provide important lessons that will inform the necessary 
policy and regulatory framework to facilitate widespread adoption and provide a 
foundation for further development of AI approaches to other aspects of PV.

© 2022. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01157-4
PMCID: PMC9112277
PMID: 35579808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Robert Ball is an author on US Patent 9,075,796, 
‘Text mining for large medical text datasets and corresponding medical text 
classification using informative feature selection’. At present, this patent is 
not licensed and does not generate royalties. Gerald Dal Pan has no conflicts of 
interest.


276. Ther Innov Regul Sci. 2020 Jul;54(4):888-899. doi: 10.1007/s43441-019-00023-3. 
Epub 2019 Dec 28.

Utilizing Advanced Technologies to Augment Pharmacovigilance Systems: Challenges 
and Opportunities.

Lewis DJ(1)(2), McCallum JF(3).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Global Drug Development, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Oeflinger Strasse 44, 
D-79664, Wehr, Germany. david-1.lewis@novartis.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Postgraduate Medicine, University of 
Hertfordshire, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, AL10 9AB, UK. 
david-1.lewis@novartis.com.
(3)Product Development Safety Risk Management, Roche Products Limited, 6 Falcon 
Way, Shire Park, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, AL7 1TW, UK.

There are significant challenges and opportunities in deploying and utilizing 
advanced information technology (IT) within pharmacovigilance (PV) systems and 
across the pharmaceutical industry. Various aspects of PV will benefit from 
automation (e.g., by improving standardization or increasing data quality). 
Several themes are developed, highlighting the challenges faced, exploring 
solutions, and assessing the potential for further research. Automation of the 
workflow for processing of individual case safety reports (ICSRs) is adopted as 
a use case. This involves a logical progression through a series of steps that 
when linked together comprise the complete work process required for the 
effective management of ICSRs. We recognize that the rapid development of new 
technologies will invariably outpace the regulations applicable to PV systems. 
Nevertheless, we believe that such systems may be improved by intelligent 
automation. It is incumbent on the owners of these systems to explore 
opportunities presented by new technologies with regulators in order to evaluate 
the applicability, design, deployment, performance, validation and maintenance 
of advanced technologies to ensure that the PV system continues to be fit for 
purpose. Proposed approaches to the validation of automated PV systems are 
presented. A series of definitions and a critical appraisal of important 
considerations are provided in the form of use cases. We summarize progress made 
and opportunities for the development of automation of future systems. The 
overall goal of automation is to provide high quality safety data in the correct 
format, in context, more quickly, and with less manual effort. This will improve 
the evidence available for scientific assessment and helps to inform and 
expedite decisions about the minimization of risks associated with medicines.

DOI: 10.1007/s43441-019-00023-3
PMCID: PMC7362887
PMID: 32557311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
However, all authors are employees and/or stockholders of the companies with 
which they are affiliated.


277. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 Jun 6;290:552-556. doi: 10.3233/SHTI220138.

Data Veracity of Patients and Health Consumers Reported Adverse Drug Reactions 
on Twitter: Key Linguistic Features, Twitter Variables, and Association Rules.

Lyu T(1), Eidson A(2), Jun J(3), Zhou X(4), Cui X(5), Liang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Services Policy and Management, Arnold School of Public 
Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, 
USA.
(3)School of Journalism and Mass Communications, College of Information and 
Communications, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.

As Twitter emerged as an important data source for pharmacovigilance, 
heterogeneous data veracity becomes a major concern for extracted adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs). Our objective is to categorize different levels of data 
veracity and explore linguistic features of tweets and Twitter variables as they 
may be used for automatic screening high-veracity tweets that contain 
ADR-related information. We annotated a published Twitter corpus with linguistic 
features from existing studies and clinical experts. Multinomial logistic 
regression models found that first-person pronouns, expressing negative 
sentiment, ADR and drug name being in the same sentence were significantly 
associated with higher levels of data veracity (p<0.05), using medical 
terminology and fewer indications were associated with good data veracity 
(p<0.05), less drug numbers were marginally associated with good data veracity 
(p=0.053). These findings suggest opportunities for developing machine learning 
models for automatic screening of ADR-related tweets using key linguistic 
features, Twitter variables, and association rules.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI220138
PMID: 35673077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Molecules. 2019 Jul 29;24(15):2747. doi: 10.3390/molecules24152747.

Combined Ensemble Docking and Machine Learning in Identification of Therapeutic 
Agents with Potential Inhibitory Effect on Human CES1.

Briand E(1), Thomsen R(2), Linnet K(2), Rasmussen HB(3)(4), Brunak S(5), 
Taboureau O(6).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1133, CNRS UMR 8251, Unit of functional and adaptive biology, 
Université de Paris, Paris 75013, France.
(2)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
(4)Department of Science and Environment, Roskilde University, 4000 Roskilde, 
Denmark.
(5)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(6)INSERM U1133, CNRS UMR 8251, Unit of functional and adaptive biology, 
Université de Paris, Paris 75013, France. 
Olivier.taboureau@univ-paris-diderot.fr.

The human carboxylesterase 1 (CES1), responsible for the biotransformation of 
many diverse therapeutic agents, may contribute to the occurrence of adverse 
drug reactions and therapeutic failure through drug interactions. The present 
study is designed to address the issue of potential drug interactions resulting 
from the inhibition of CES1. Based on an ensemble of 10 crystal structures 
complexed with different ligands and a set of 294 known CES1 ligands, we used 
docking (Autodock Vina) and machine learning methodologies (LDA, QDA and 
multilayer perceptron), considering the different energy terms from the scoring 
function to assess the best combination to enable the identification of CES1 
inhibitors. The protocol was then applied on a library of 1114 FDA-approved 
drugs and eight drugs were selected for in vitro CES1 inhibition. An inhibition 
effect was observed for diltiazem (IC50 = 13.9 µM). Three others drugs 
(benztropine, iloprost and treprostinil), exhibited a weak CES1 inhibitory 
effects with IC50 values of 298.2 µM, 366.8 µM and 391.6 µM respectively. In 
conclusion, the binding site of CES1 is relatively flexible and can adapt its 
conformation to different types of ligands. Combining ensemble docking and 
machine learning approaches improves the prediction of CES1 inhibitors compared 
to a docking study using only one crystal structure.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24152747
PMCID: PMC6696021
PMID: 31362390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


279. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 18;12:711868. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.711868. 
eCollection 2021.

A Machine Learning Model to Predict Risperidone Active Moiety Concentration 
Based on Initial Therapeutic Drug Monitoring.

Guo W(1)(2), Yu Z(3), Gao Y(4), Lan X(1)(2), Zang Y(1)(2), Yu P(3), Wang Z(5), 
Sun W(6), Hao X(7), Gao F(3).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, The National Clinical Research 
Center for Mental Disorders, Beijing Anding Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Advanced Innovation Center for Human Brain Protection, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China.
(4)Lugouqiao Community Health Service Center, Beijing, China.
(5)School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Xi'an Jiaotong-liverpool University, Suzhou, China.
(7)Dalian Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd., Dalian, China.

Risperidone is an efficacious second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) to treat a 
wide spectrum of psychiatric diseases, whereas its active moiety (risperidone 
and 9-hydroxyrisperidone) concentration without a therapeutic reference range 
may increase the risk of adverse drug reactions. We aimed to establish a 
prediction model of risperidone active moiety concentration in the next 
therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) based on the initial TDM information using 
machine learning methods. A total of 983 patients treated with risperidone 
between May 2017 and May 2018 in Beijing Anding Hospital were collected as the 
data set. Sixteen predictors (the initial TDM value, dosage, age, WBC, PLT, BUN, 
weight, BMI, prolactin, ALT, MECT, Cr, AST, Ccr, TDM interval, and RBC) were 
screened from 26 variables through univariate analysis (p < 0.05) and XGBoost 
(importance score >0). Ten algorithms (XGBoost, LightGBM, CatBoost, AdaBoost, 
Random Forest, support vector machine, lasso regression, ridge regression, 
linear regression, and k-nearest neighbor) compared the model performance, and 
ultimately, XGBoost was chosen to establish the prediction model. A cohort of 
210 patients treated with risperidone between March 1, 2019, and May 31, 2019, 
in Beijing Anding Hospital was used to validate the model. Finally, the 
prediction model was evaluated, obtaining R 2 (0.512 in test cohort; 0.374 in 
validation cohort), MAE (10.97 in test cohort; 12.07 in validation cohort), MSE 
(198.55 in test cohort; 324.15 in validation cohort), RMSE (14.09 in test 
cohort; 18.00 in validation cohort), and accuracy of the predicted TDM within 
±30% of the actual TDM (54.82% in test cohort; 60.95% in validation cohort). The 
prediction model has promising performance to facilitate rational risperidone 
regimen on an individualized level and provide reference for other antipsychotic 
drugs' risk prediction.

Copyright © 2021 Guo, Yu, Gao, Lan, Zang, Yu, Wang, Sun, Hao and Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.711868
PMCID: PMC8637165
PMID: 34867511

Conflict of interest statement: ZY, PY, ZW, and FG are employed by Beijing 
Medicinovo Technology Co. Ltd. XH is employed by Dalian Medicinovo Technology 
Co. Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.


280. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2022 Jan;10(1):277-283. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.09.014. Epub 2021 Sep 20.

Deep Neural Network for Early Image Diagnosis of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic 
Epidermal Necrolysis.

Fujimoto A(1), Iwai Y(2), Ishikawa T(3), Shinkuma S(2), Shido K(4), Yamasaki 
K(4), Fujisawa Y(5), Fujimoto M(6), Muramatsu S(7), Abe R(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Medical Bit Valley Aile Home Clinic, Nagaoka, 
Japan. Electronic address: afujimoto@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Informatics, Niigata University Medical and Dental 
Hospital, Niigata, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Suita, Japan.
(7)Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, Niigata University 
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata, Japan. Electronic address: 
shogo@eng.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(8)Division of Dermatology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan. Electronic address: aberi@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2022 Jan;10(1):284-285.

BACKGROUND: Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a 
life-threatening cutaneous adverse drug reaction (cADR). Distinguishing SJS/TEN 
from nonsevere cADRs is difficult, especially in the early stages of the 
disease.
OBJECTIVE: To overcome this limitation, we developed a computer-aided diagnosis 
system for the early diagnosis of SJS/TEN, powered by a deep convolutional 
neural network (DCNN).
METHODS: We trained a DCNN using a dataset of 26,661 individual lesion images 
obtained from 123 patients with a diagnosis of SJS/TEN or nonsevere cADRs. The 
DCNN's accuracy of classification was compared with that of 10 board-certified 
dermatologists and 24 trainee dermatologists.
RESULTS: The DCNN achieved 84.6% sensitivity (95% confidence interval [CI], 
80.6-88.6), whereas the sensitivities of the board-certified dermatologists and 
trainee dermatologists were 31.3 % (95% CI, 20.9-41.8; P < .0001) and 27.8% (95% 
CI, 22.6-32.5; P < .0001), respectively. The negative predictive value was 94.6% 
(95% CI, 93.2-96.0) for the DCNN, 68.1% (95% CI, 66.1-70.0; P < .0001) for the 
board-certified dermatologists, and 67.4% (95% CI, 66.1-68.7; P < .0001) for the 
trainee dermatologists. The area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve of the DCNN for a SJS/TEN diagnosis was 0.873, which was significantly 
higher than that for all board-certified dermatologists and trainee 
dermatologists.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a DCNN to classify SJS/TEN and nonsevere cADRs based 
on individual lesion images of erythema. The DCNN performed significantly better 
than did dermatologists in classifying SJS/TEN from skin images.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.09.014
PMID: 34547536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2015 Jul 27;1(2):e7. doi: 
10.2196/publichealth.4488. eCollection 2015 Jul-Dec.

Identifying Adverse Effects of HIV Drug Treatment and Associated Sentiments 
Using Twitter.

Adrover C(1), Bodnar T(1), Huang Z(1), Telenti A(#)(2), Salathé M(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease DynamicsDepartment of BiologyPenn State 
UniversityUniversity Park, PAUnited States.
(2)J. Craig Venter InstituteLa Jolla, CAUnited States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Social media platforms are increasingly seen as a source of data on 
a wide range of health issues. Twitter is of particular interest for public 
health surveillance because of its public nature. However, the very public 
nature of social media platforms such as Twitter may act as a barrier to public 
health surveillance, as people may be reluctant to publicly disclose information 
about their health. This is of particular concern in the context of diseases 
that are associated with a certain degree of stigma, such as HIV/AIDS.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study is to assess whether adverse effects of 
HIV drug treatment and associated sentiments can be determined using publicly 
available data from social media.
METHODS: We describe a combined approach of machine learning and crowdsourced 
human assessment to identify adverse effects of HIV drug treatment solely on 
individual reports posted publicly on Twitter. Starting from a large dataset of 
40 million tweets collected over three years, we identify a very small subset 
(1642; 0.004%) of individual reports describing personal experiences with HIV 
drug treatment.
RESULTS: Despite the small size of the extracted final dataset, the summary 
representation of adverse effects attributed to specific drugs, or drug 
combinations, accurately captures well-recognized toxicities. In addition, the 
data allowed us to discriminate across specific drug compounds, to identify 
preferred drugs over time, and to capture novel events such as the availability 
of preexposure prophylaxis.
CONCLUSIONS: The effect of limited data sharing due to the public nature of the 
data can be partially offset by the large number of people sharing data in the 
first place, an observation that may play a key role in digital epidemiology in 
general.

DOI: 10.2196/publichealth.4488
PMCID: PMC4869211
PMID: 27227141

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


282. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 1;13(3):e0193959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193959. 
eCollection 2018.

A hierarchical anatomical classification schema for prediction of phenotypic 
side effects.

Wadhwa S(1)(2), Gupta A(1)(3), Dokania S(1)(4), Kanji R(1)(5), Bagler G(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of Information 
Technology (IIIT-Delhi), New Delhi, 110020, India.
(2)Maharaja Agrasen Institute of Technology, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha 
University, New Delhi, 110086, India.
(3)Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women, New Delhi, 110006, India.
(4)Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, 110042, India.
(5)Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur, Jodhpur, 342011, India.

Prediction of adverse drug reactions is an important problem in drug discovery 
endeavors which can be addressed with data-driven strategies. SIDER is one of 
the most reliable and frequently used datasets for identification of key 
features as well as building machine learning models for side effects 
prediction. The inherently unbalanced nature of this data presents with a 
difficult multi-label multi-class problem towards prediction of drug side 
effects. We highlight the intrinsic issue with SIDER data and methodological 
flaws in relying on performance measures such as AUC while attempting to predict 
side effects.We argue for the use of metrics that are robust to class imbalance 
for evaluation of classifiers. Importantly, we present a 'hierarchical 
anatomical classification schema' which aggregates side effects into organs, 
sub-systems, and systems. With the help of a weighted performance measure, using 
5-fold cross-validation we show that this strategy facilitates biologically 
meaningful side effects prediction at different levels of anatomical hierarchy. 
By implementing various machine learning classifiers we show that Random Forest 
model yields best classification accuracy at each level of coarse-graining. The 
manually curated, hierarchical schema for side effects can also serve as the 
basis of future studies towards prediction of adverse reactions and 
identification of key features linked to specific organ systems. Our study 
provides a strategy for hierarchical classification of side effects rooted in 
the anatomy and can pave the way for calibrated expert systems for multi-level 
prediction of side effects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193959
PMCID: PMC5832387
PMID: 29494708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


283. JAMIA Open. 2021 Oct 8;4(4):ooab081. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooab081. eCollection 
2021 Oct.

Deep learning models in detection of dietary supplement adverse event signals 
from Twitter.

Wang Y(1), Zhao Y(2), Schutte D(1), Bian J(2), Zhang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Health Outcomes & Biomedical Informatics, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to develop a deep learning pipeline to 
detect signals on dietary supplement-related adverse events (DS AEs) from 
Twitter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We obtained 247 807 tweets ranging from 2012 to 2018 that 
mentioned both DS and AE. We designed a tailor-made annotation guideline for DS 
AEs and annotated biomedical entities and relations on 2000 tweets. For the 
concept extraction task, we fine-tuned and compared the performance of 
BioClinical-BERT, PubMedBERT, ELECTRA, RoBERTa, and DeBERTa models with a CRF 
classifier. For the relation extraction task, we fine-tuned and compared BERT 
models to BioClinical-BERT, PubMedBERT, RoBERTa, and DeBERTa models. We chose 
the best-performing models in each task to assemble an end-to-end deep learning 
pipeline to detect DS AE signals and compared the results to the known DS AEs 
from a DS knowledge base (ie, iDISK).
RESULTS: DeBERTa-CRF model outperformed other models in the concept extraction 
task, scoring a lenient microaveraged F1 score of 0.866. RoBERTa model 
outperformed other models in the relation extraction task, scoring a lenient 
microaveraged F1 score of 0.788. The end-to-end pipeline built on these 2 models 
was able to extract DS indication and DS AEs with a lenient microaveraged F1 
score of 0.666.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a deep learning pipeline that can detect DS AE 
signals from Twitter. We have found DS AEs that were not recorded in an existing 
knowledge base (iDISK) and our proposed pipeline can as sist DS AE 
pharmacovigilance.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooab081
PMCID: PMC8497875
PMID: 34632323


284. iScience. 2022 Oct 6;25(11):105290. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105290. eCollection 
2022 Nov 18.

Machine learning and structure-based modeling for the prediction of 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase inhibition.

Dudas B(1)(2), Bagdad Y(1), Picard M(1), Perahia D(2), Miteva MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Inserm U1268 MCTR, CiTCoM UMR 8038 CNRS - Université Paris Cité, Paris, 
France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée (LBPA), UMR8113, Ecole 
Normale Supérieure Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are responsible for 35% of the phase II drug 
metabolism. In this study, we focused on UGT1A1, which is a key UGT isoform. 
Strong inhibition of UGT1A1 may trigger adverse drug/herb-drug interactions, or 
result in disorders of endobiotic metabolism. Most of the current machine 
learning methods predicting the inhibition of drug metabolizing enzymes neglect 
protein structure and dynamics, both being essential for the recognition of 
various substrates and inhibitors. We performed molecular dynamics simulations 
on a homology model of the human UGT1A1 structure containing both the cofactor- 
(UDP-glucuronic acid) and substrate-binding domains to explore UGT 
conformational changes. Then, we created models for the prediction of UGT1A1 
inhibitors by integrating information on UGT1A1 structure and dynamics, 
interactions with diverse ligands, and machine learning. These models can be 
helpful for further prediction of drug-drug interactions of drug candidates and 
safety treatments.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105290
PMCID: PMC9593791
PMID: 36304105

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


285. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Dec 1;26(12):1618-1626. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz156.

Deep neural networks ensemble for detecting medication mentions in tweets.

Weissenbacher D(1), Sarker A(1), Klein A(1), O'Connor K(1), Magge A(2), 
Gonzalez-Hernandez G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, Biodesign Institute, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Twitter posts are now recognized as an important source of 
patient-generated data, providing unique insights into population health. A 
fundamental step toward incorporating Twitter data in pharmacoepidemiologic 
research is to automatically recognize medication mentions in tweets. Given that 
lexical searches for medication names suffer from low recall due to misspellings 
or ambiguity with common words, we propose a more advanced method to recognize 
them.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We present Kusuri, an Ensemble Learning classifier able 
to identify tweets mentioning drug products and dietary supplements. Kusuri (, 
"medication" in Japanese) is composed of 2 modules: first, 4 different 
classifiers (lexicon based, spelling variant based, pattern based, and a weakly 
trained neural network) are applied in parallel to discover tweets potentially 
containing medication names; second, an ensemble of deep neural networks 
encoding morphological, semantic, and long-range dependencies of important words 
in the tweets makes the final decision.
RESULTS: On a class-balanced (50-50) corpus of 15 005 tweets, Kusuri 
demonstrated performances close to human annotators with an F1 score of 93.7%, 
the best score achieved thus far on this corpus. On a corpus made of all tweets 
posted by 112 Twitter users (98 959 tweets, with only 0.26% mentioning 
medications), Kusuri obtained an F1 score of 78.8%. To the best of our 
knowledge, Kusuri is the first system to achieve this score on such an extremely 
imbalanced dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: The system identifies tweets mentioning drug names with performance 
high enough to ensure its usefulness, and is ready to be integrated in 
pharmacovigilance, toxicovigilance, or more generally, public health pipelines 
that depend on medication name mentions.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz156
PMCID: PMC6857507
PMID: 31562510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Pharm Policy Pract. 2021 Jun 2;14(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s40545-021-00329-4.

Big data, medicines safety and pharmacovigilance.

Hussain R(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, The University of Lahore, Lahore, 54000, Pakistan. 
rabia.hussain2010@gmail.com.

DOI: 10.1186/s40545-021-00329-4
PMCID: PMC8170061
PMID: 34078480

Conflict of interest statement: None.


287. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015 May;22(3):671-81. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocu041. Epub 
2015 Mar 9.

Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining adverse drug reaction mentions using 
sequence labeling with word embedding cluster features.

Nikfarjam A(1), Sarker A(2), O'Connor K(2), Ginn R(2), Gonzalez G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA anikfarj@asu.edu graciela.gonzalez@asu.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Social media is becoming increasingly popular as a platform for 
sharing personal health-related information. This information can be utilized 
for public health monitoring tasks, particularly for pharmacovigilance, via the 
use of natural language processing (NLP) techniques. However, the language in 
social media is highly informal, and user-expressed medical concepts are often 
nontechnical, descriptive, and challenging to extract. There has been limited 
progress in addressing these challenges, and thus far, advanced machine 
learning-based NLP techniques have been underutilized. Our objective is to 
design a machine learning-based approach to extract mentions of adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs) from highly informal text in social media.
METHODS: We introduce ADRMine, a machine learning-based concept extraction 
system that uses conditional random fields (CRFs). ADRMine utilizes a variety of 
features, including a novel feature for modeling words' semantic similarities. 
The similarities are modeled by clustering words based on unsupervised, 
pretrained word representation vectors (embeddings) generated from unlabeled 
user posts in social media using a deep learning technique.
RESULTS: ADRMine outperforms several strong baseline systems in the ADR 
extraction task by achieving an F-measure of 0.82. Feature analysis demonstrates 
that the proposed word cluster features significantly improve extraction 
performance.
CONCLUSION: It is possible to extract complex medical concepts, with relatively 
high performance, from informal, user-generated content. Our approach is 
particularly scalable, suitable for social media mining, as it relies on large 
volumes of unlabeled data, thus diminishing the need for large, annotated 
training data sets.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocu041
PMCID: PMC4457113
PMID: 25755127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Mach Learn Res. 2019 Aug;106:216-229.

Clinical Judgement Study using Question Answering from Electronic Health 
Records.

Singh Rawat BP(1), Li F(2), Yu H(2).

Author information:
(1)CICS Department, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(2)CS Department, University of Massachusetts, Lowell, MA, USA.

Clinical judgement studies are essential for recognising the causal relation of 
a medication with adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Traditionally, these studies 
are conducted via expert manual chart review. By contrast, we propose an 
end-to-end deep learning question answering model to automatically infer such 
causal relations. Our proposed model identifies the causal relation by answering 
a subset of Naranjo questionnaire Naranjo et al. (1981) from electronic health 
records. It employs multi-level attention layers along with local and global 
context while answering these questions. Our proposed model achieves a 
macroweighted F-score of 0.4598 - 0.5142 across the selected questions and an 
overall F-score of 0.5011. We also did an ablation study to validate the 
importance of local and global context for the model.

PMCID: PMC6939641
PMID: 31897452


289. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2012;2012:1030-9. Epub 2012 Nov 3.

Automatic adverse drug events detection using letters to the editor.

Yang C(1), Srinivasan P, Polgreen PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

We present and test the intuition that letters to the editor in journals carry 
early signals of adverse drug events (ADEs). Surprisingly these letters have not 
yet been exploited for automatic ADE detection unlike for example, clinical 
records and PubMed. Part of the challenge is that it is not easy to access the 
full-text of letters (for the most part these do not appear in PubMed). Also 
letters are likely underrated in comparison with full articles. Besides 
demonstrating that this intuition holds we contribute techniques for post market 
drug surveillance. Specifically, we test an automatic approach for ADE detection 
from letters using off-the-shelf machine learning tools. We also involve natural 
language processing for feature definitions. Overall we achieve high accuracy in 
our experiments and our method also works well on a second new test set. Our 
results encourage us to further pursue this line of research.

PMCID: PMC3540506
PMID: 23304379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. BMJ Open. 2020 Apr 27;10(4):e032624. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032624.

Influence of metabolic profiles on the safety of drug therapy in routine care in 
Germany: protocol of the cohort study EMPAR.

Huebner T(1), Steffens M(1), Linder R(2), Fracowiak J(1), Langner D(2), Garling 
M(2), Falkenberg F(2), Roethlein C(3), Gomm W(3), Haenisch B(1)(3)(4), Stingl 
J(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Bonn, 
North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.
(2)Techniker Krankenkasse, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Population Health Sciences, German Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Bonn, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.
(4)Centre for Translational Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, North 
Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.
(5)Institute for Clinical Pharmacology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, North 
Rhine-Westphalia, Germany jstingl@ukaachen.de.

INTRODUCTION: Pre-emptive testing of pharmacogenetically relevant 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms can be an effective tool in the prevention of 
adverse drug reactions and therapy resistance. However, most of the tests are 
not used as standard in routine care in Germany because of lacking evidence for 
the clinical and economical benefit and their impact on the usage of healthcare 
services. We address this issue by investigating the influence of 
pharmacogenetic profiles on the use of healthcare services over an extended 
period of several years using routine care data from a statutory health 
insurance company. The goal is to provide clinical evidence whether pre-emptive 
pharmacogenetic testing of metabolic profiles in routine care in Germany is 
beneficial and cost-effective.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The EMPAR (Einfluss metabolischer Profile auf die 
Arzneimitteltherapiesicherheit in der Routineversorgung) study is a 
non-interventional cohort study conducted to analyse pharmacogenetic risk 
factors that are important for drug therapy by means of endpoints relevant for 
healthcare. The analysis is based on pharmacogenetic profiles and statutory 
health insurance data. We perform pharmacogenetic, pharmacoepidemiological and 
pharmacoeconomic analyses using health care utilisation scores and machine 
learning techniques. Therefore, we aim to include about 10 000 patients (≥18 
years) insured by the health insurance provider Techniker Krankenkasse. The 
study focuses on patients with prescriptions of anticoagulants and prescriptions 
of cholesterol-lowering drugs. Also, a screening for special pharmacogenetic 
characteristics will be performed in patients with at least one Y57.9! diagnosis 
(Complication of medical and surgical care: drug or medicament, unspecified). 
Outcomes include the utilisation of health insurance services, the incidence of 
incapacity for work and costs for drugs and treatment.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of 
the Medical Faculty, University of Bonn (Lfd. Nr. 339/17). The results of this 
research project will be published in scientific open access journals and at 
conferences.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: German Clinical Trials Register, DRKS00013909.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032624
PMCID: PMC7213853
PMID: 32345696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


291. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2022 Jun;26(11):4074-4081. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202206_28977.

IL-4/13 Blockade and sleep-related adverse drug reactions in over 37,000 
Dupilumab reports from the World Health Organization Individual Case Safety 
reporting pharmacovigilance database (VigiBase™): a big data and machine 
learning analysis.

Alroobaea R(1), Rubaiee S, Hanbazazah AS, Jahrami H, Garbarino S, Damiani G, Wu 
J, Bragazzi NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, College of Computers and Information 
Technology, Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia. bragazzi@yorku.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Atopic dermatitis displays a relevant sleep burden sustained by 
clinical (i.e., itch), psychological (i.e., inadequate coping strategies) and 
therapeutic (i.e., frequent loss of drug response) triggers. Dupilumab, the 
first biologic approved for atopic dermatitis, showed excellent effects on 
improving pruritus and sleep after only two weeks of treatment but, in some 
cases, may have paradoxical effects. The rate of sleep-related side-effects 
remains unknown. More specifically, adverse-drug reactions (ADRs) related to 
dupilumab have been investigated during the safety phase of randomized clinical 
trials or in small retrospective epidemiological surveys, but little is known 
about sleep-related ADRs in real-life settings. Therefore, we took advantage of 
a global large-scale pharmacovigilance database, carrying out a comprehensive 
data mining analysis to look at different sleep-related ADRs reported among 
patients under anti IL-4/13 therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed individual case study reports (ICSRs) in 
VigiBaseTM, the World Health Organization (WHO) global pharmacovigilance 
database of ADRs collected by national drug authorities in > 140 countries (> 
90% of the world population). We looked for patterns of potentially 
sleep-related ADRs and we applied a disproportionality analysis based on 
Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN). A meta-analytical 
approach was used to synthesize the overall effect size of sleep-related ADRs 
potentially associated to Dupilumab administration.
RESULTS: From inception up to March 9, 2021, 94,065 ADRs from 37,848 unique 
reports were included and analyzed in the present paper: 1,294 of them (1.4%) 
concerned sleep disturbances (n=27). Most of sleep-related complaints were 
generic sleep disorders (n=630), followed by insomnia (n=312), somnolence 
(n=81), lethargy (n=60), night sweats (n=30), middle insomnia (n=39), 
hypersomnia (n=25), poor-quality sleep (n=21), initial insomnia (n=17), sleep 
apnea syndrome (n=13), nightmares (n=11) and sleep deficit (n=11). 
Interestingly, restlessness and restless leg syndrome, nocturnal dyspnea, 
narcolepsy and bruxism were reported in 7, 6, 5, 4 and 3 cases, respectively. 
Only sleep deficit [OR 15.67 (95% CrI 8.61-28.51); IC 3.24 (95% CrI 2.26-3.97)], 
generic sleep disorder [OR 6.22 (95% CrI 5.74-6.73); IC 2.60 (95% CrI 
2.48-2.71)], nocturnal dyspnea [OR 3.68 (95% CrI 1.53-8.87); IC 1.56 (95% CrI 
0.03-2.56)] and middle insomnia [OR 1.87 (95% CrI 1.36-2.56); IC 0.88 (95% CrI 
0.39-1.30)] achieved the statistical significance threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: In this work, we identified over 37,000 unique case-reports of 
Dupilumab side-effects reported on the WHO pharmacovigilance database. We 
specifically categorized those related to sleep issues, which were 1,294. Our 
findings from large numbers of cases provide data supporting the clinical 
observations that Dupilumab is usually effective in improving sleep quality and 
sleep disturbances/impairments, given the lack of statistical significance of 
several sleep-related ADRs. Further work is needed to closely scrutinize the 
impact of Dupilumab on sleep, in terms of underlying mechanisms, and to better 
understand residual sleep disorders in patients with atopic dermatitis and other 
allergic diseases treated with Dupilumab. Thus, sleep monitoring may be helpful 
for dermatologists in managing atopic dermatitis patients treated with 
dupilumab. The limitations of spontaneous reporting systems including 
underreporting and reporting bias, heterogeneity of sources and impossibility to 
infer any causal relationship merit consideration and further research is 
needed.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202206_28977
PMID: 35731078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jul 18;13:944516. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.944516. 
eCollection 2022.

Major areas of interest of artificial intelligence research applied to health 
care administrative data: a scoping review.

Bukhtiyarova O(1), Abderrazak A(1), Chiu Y(1)(2), Sparano S(1), Simard M(2)(3), 
Sirois C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Quebec National Institute of Public Health, Québec, QC, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.

Introduction: The ongoing collection of large medical data has created 
conditions for application of artificial intelligence (AI) in research. This 
scoping review aimed to identify major areas of interest of AI applied to health 
care administrative data. Methods: The search was performed in seven databases: 
Medline, Embase, CINAHL, Web of science, IEEE, ICM digital library, and 
Compendex. We included articles published between January 2001 and March 2021, 
that described research with AI applied to medical diagnostics, pharmacotherapy, 
and health outcomes data. We screened the full text content and used natural 
language processing to automatically extract health areas of interest, principal 
AI methods, and names of medications. Results: Out of 14,864 articles, 343 were 
included. We determined ten areas of interest, the most common being health 
diagnostic or treatment outcome prediction (32%); representation of medical 
data, clinical pathways, and data temporality (i.e., transformation of raw 
medical data into compact and analysis-friendly format) (22%); and adverse drug 
effects, drug-drug interactions, and medication cascades (15%). Less attention 
has been devoted to areas such as health effects of polypharmacy (1%); and 
reinforcement learning (1%). The most common AI methods were decision trees, 
cluster analysis, random forests, and support vector machines. Most frequently 
mentioned medications included insulin, metformin, vitamins, acetaminophen, and 
heparin. Conclusions: The scoping review revealed the potential of AI 
application to health-related studies. However, several areas of interest in 
pharmacoepidemiology are sparsely reported, and the lack of details in studies 
related to pharmacotherapy suggests that AI could be used more optimally in 
pharmacoepidemiologic research.

Copyright © 2022 Bukhtiyarova, Abderrazak, Chiu, Sparano, Simard and Sirois.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.944516
PMCID: PMC9340156
PMID: 35924057

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


293. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2022 Oct 11. doi: 10.1002/pds.5548. Online ahead of 
print.

Methods for drug safety signal detection using routinely collected observational 
electronic health care data: a systematic review.

Coste A(1), Wong A(1), Bokern M(1), Bate A(1)(2), Douglas IJ(1).

Author information:
(1)LSHTM, Department of non-communicable disease epidemiology.
(2)GlaxoSmith Kline.

PURPOSE: Signal detection is a crucial step in the discovery of post-marketing 
adverse drug reactions. There is a growing interest in using routinely collected 
data to complement established spontaneous report analyses. This work aims to 
systematically review the methods for drug safety signal detection using 
routinely collected healthcare data and their performance, both in general and 
for specific types of drugs and outcomes.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review following the PRISMA guidelines, and 
registered a protocol in PROSPERO. MEDLINE, EMBASE, PubMed, Web of Science, 
Scopus and the Cochrane Library were searched until 13th July 2021.
RESULTS: The review included 101 articles, among which there were 39 
methodological works, 25 performance assessment papers and 24 observational 
studies. Methods included adaptations from those used with spontaneous reports, 
traditional epidemiological designs, methods specific to signal detection with 
real-world data. More recently, implementations of machine learning have been 
studied in the literature. 25 studies evaluated method performances, 16 of them 
using the area under the curve (AUC) for a range of positive and negative 
controls as their main measure. Despite the likelihood that performance 
measurement could vary by drug-event pair, only 10 studies reported performance 
stratified by drugs and outcomes, in a heterogeneous manner. The replicability 
of the performance assessment results was limited due to lack of transparency in 
reporting and the lack of a gold standard reference set.
CONCLUSIONS: A variety of methods have been described in the literature for 
signal detection with routinely collected data. No method showed superior 
performance in all papers and across all drugs and outcomes, performance 
assessment and reporting were heterogeneous. However, there is limited evidence 
that self-controlled designs, high dimensional propensity scores and machine 
learning can achieve higher performances than other methods. This article is 
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.5548
PMID: 36218170


294. Drug Saf. 2021 Mar;44(3):373-382. doi: 10.1007/s40264-020-01028-w. Epub 2020 Dec 
22.

Developing Crowdsourced Training Data Sets for Pharmacovigilance Intelligent 
Automation.

Gartland A(1), Bate A(2), Painter JL(3), Casperson TA(4), Powell GE(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA.
(2)Safety and Medical Governance, GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.
(3)JiveCast, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(4)North American Medical Affairs, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
USA.
(5)Pharma Safety, GlaxoSmithKline, 5 Moore Dr., Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709, USA. gregory.e.powell@gsk.com.

INTRODUCTION: Machine learning offers an alluring solution to developing 
automated approaches to the increasing individual case safety report burden 
being placed upon pharmacovigilance. Leveraging crowdsourcing to annotate 
unstructured data may provide accurate, efficient, and contemporaneous training 
data sets in support of machine learning.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate whether crowdsourcing can 
be used to accurately and efficiently develop training data sets in support of 
pharmacovigilance automation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pharmacovigilance experts created a reference dataset by 
reviewing 15,490 de-identified social media posts of narratives pertaining to 15 
drugs and 22 medically relevant topics. A random sampling of posts from the 
reference dataset was published on Amazon Turk and its users (Turkers) were 
asked a series of questions about those same medical concepts. Accuracy, price 
elasticity, and time efficiency were evaluated.
RESULTS: Accuracy of crowdsourced curation exceeded 90% when compared to the 
reference dataset and was completed in about 5% of the time. There was an 
increase in time efficiency with higher pay, but there was no significant 
difference in accuracy. Additionally, having a social media post reviewed by 
more than one Turker (using a voting system) did not offer significant 
improvements in terms of accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Crowdsourcing is an accurate and efficient method that can be used 
to develop training data sets in support of pharmacovigilance automation. More 
research is needed to better understand the breadth and depth of possible uses 
as well as strengths, limitations, and generalizability of results.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-020-01028-w
PMID: 33354751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biomed Inform. 2014 Oct;51:191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.05.013. Epub 2014 
Jun 10.

Automatic construction of a large-scale and accurate drug-side-effect 
association knowledge base from biomedical literature.

Xu R(1), Wang Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Informatics Program, Center for Clinical Investigation, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, United States. Electronic address: 
rxx@case.edu.
(2)ThinTek, LLC, Palo Alto, CA 94306, United States. Electronic address: 
qwang@thintek.com.

Systems approaches to studying drug-side-effect (drug-SE) associations are 
emerging as an active research area for drug target discovery, drug 
repositioning, and drug toxicity prediction. However, currently available 
drug-SE association databases are far from being complete. Herein, in an effort 
to increase the data completeness of current drug-SE relationship resources, we 
present an automatic learning approach to accurately extract drug-SE pairs from 
the vast amount of published biomedical literature, a rich knowledge source of 
side effect information for commercial, experimental, and even failed drugs. For 
the text corpus, we used 119,085,682 MEDLINE sentences and their parse trees. We 
used known drug-SE associations derived from US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) drug labels as prior knowledge to find relevant sentences and parse trees. 
We extracted syntactic patterns associated with drug-SE pairs from the resulting 
set of parse trees. We developed pattern-ranking algorithms to prioritize 
drug-SE-specific patterns. We then selected a set of patterns with both high 
precisions and recalls in order to extract drug-SE pairs from the entire 
MEDLINE. In total, we extracted 38,871 drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE using the 
learned patterns, the majority of which have not been captured in FDA drug 
labels to date. On average, our knowledge-driven pattern-learning approach in 
extracting drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE has achieved a precision of 0.833, a 
recall of 0.407, and an F1 of 0.545. We compared our approach to a support 
vector machine (SVM)-based machine learning and a co-occurrence statistics-based 
approach. We show that the pattern-learning approach is largely complementary to 
the SVM- and co-occurrence-based approaches with significantly higher precision 
and F1 but lower recall. We demonstrated by correlation analysis that the 
extracted drug side effects correlate positively with both drug targets, 
metabolism, and indications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.05.013
PMCID: PMC4589180
PMID: 24928448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2019 Jun;16(3):186-194. doi: 10.1111/wvn.12362. Epub 
2019 May 2.

Identifying Patients Experiencing Opioid-Induced Respiratory Depression During 
Recovery From Anesthesia: The Application of Electronic Monitoring Devices.

Jungquist CR(1), Chandola V(2), Spulecki C(1), Nguyen KV(3), Crescenzi P(4), 
Tekeste D(3), Sayapaneni PR(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Community Regional Medical Center, Fresno, CA, USA.
(4)Community Hospital Anesthesia Group, Syracuse, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Postsurgical patients experiencing opioid-related adverse drug 
events have 55% longer hospital stays, 47% higher costs associated with their 
care, 36% increased risk of 30-day readmission, and 3.4 times higher risk of 
inpatient mortality compared to those with no opioid-related adverse drug 
events. Most of the adverse events are preventable.
GENERAL AIM: This study explored three types of electronic monitoring devices 
(pulse oximetry, capnography, and minute ventilation [MV]) to determine which 
were more effective at identifying the patient experiencing respiratory 
compromise and, further, to determine whether algorithms could be developed from 
the electronic monitoring data to aid in earlier detection of respiratory 
depression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A study was performed in the postanesthesia care unit 
(PACU) in an inner city. Sixty patients were recruited in the preoperative 
admissions department on the day of their surgery. Forty-eight of the 60 
patients wore three types of electronic monitoring devices while they were 
recovering from back, neck, hip, or knee surgery. Machine learning models were 
used for the analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-four of the 48 patients exhibited sustained signs of 
opioid-induced respiratory depression (OIRD). Although the SpO2 values did not 
change, end-tidal CO2 levels increased, and MV decreased, representing 
hypoventilation. A machine learning model was able to predict an OIRD event 
10 min before the actual event occurred with 80% accuracy.
LINKING EVIDENCE TO ACTION: Electronic monitoring devices are currently used as 
a tool to assess respiratory status using thresholds to distinguish when 
respiratory depression has occurred. This study introduces a potential paradigm 
shift from a reactive approach to a proactive approach that would identify a 
patient at high risk for OIRD. Capnography and MV were found to be effective 
tools in detecting respiratory compromise in the PACU.

© 2019 Sigma Theta Tau International.

DOI: 10.1111/wvn.12362
PMID: 31050151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Neurol Ther. 2019 Jun;8(1):79-94. doi: 10.1007/s40120-019-0131-6. Epub 2019 Mar 
21.

Polypharmacy in an Elderly Population: Enhancing Medication Management Through 
the Use of Clinical Decision Support Software Platforms.

Keine D(1), Zelek M(2), Walker JQ(2), Sabbagh MN(3).

Author information:
(1)uMETHOD Health, Raleigh, NC, USA. dorothykeine@gmail.com.
(2)uMETHOD Health, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Polypharmacy is a growing problem in the United States. The use of 
multiple medications increases the likelihood that a patient will experience 
potential drug interactions and adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Those individuals 
with dementia or Alzheimer's disease (AD) are at greater risk, due to age, 
comorbidities, and an increased likelihood of being on a greater number of 
neuroactive medications.
METHODS: uMETHOD Health (uMH) has developed a precision medicine platform to 
address dementia and mild AD through the creation of personalized, multidomain 
treatment plans. Many interactions and ADRs may be observed, such as drug-drug 
interactions (DDIs), drug-gene interactions (DGIs), anticholinergic cognitive 
burden (ACB), and depression-inducing drugs (DIDs). uMH's algorithms can parse 
these interactions, rate them based on input from open-source databases, and 
then record all these interactions in a generated treatment plan. A total of 295 
individuals aged 65 and older were included in this analysis.
RESULTS: Of 295 individuals, 97.59% were on at least one medication, with an 
overall mean of 11.5 medications per person; 83.66% were on five or more 
medications. A total of 102 DGIs, 3642 DDIs, and one high-priority DDI were 
found in this population. There was a significant increase in the number of DDIs 
as medications per person increased (P value < 0.0001). Of the population, 
65.86% were on one or more anticholinergic drugs. There was a significant 
difference in the ACB score between individuals with cognitive decline and those 
without. In total, 60.98% of the overall population were on DIDs, with a mean of 
1.19 medications per person.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this work show that older populations have a high 
medication burden. With the growing elderly and AD populations, medication 
management for polypharmacy is a need that grows direr every year. uMH's 
platform was able to identify a multitude of polypharmacy problems that 
individuals are currently facing.
FUNDING: uMETHOD Health.

DOI: 10.1007/s40120-019-0131-6
PMCID: PMC6534631
PMID: 30900186


298. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58:122-132. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.09.015. Epub 2015 
Sep 30.

Text mining for pharmacovigilance: Using machine learning for drug name 
recognition and drug-drug interaction extraction and classification.

Ben Abacha A(1), Chowdhury MFM(2), Karanasiou A(3), Mrabet Y(4), Lavelli A(5), 
Zweigenbaum P(6).

Author information:
(1)Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Luxembourg. Electronic 
address: asma.benabacha@list.lu.
(2)IBM Research, NY, USA. Electronic address: mchowdh@us.ibm.com.
(3)Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Luxembourg. Electronic 
address: aikaterini.karanasiou@list.lu.
(4)Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Luxembourg. Electronic 
address: yassine.mrabet@list.lu.
(5)HLT Research Unit, FBK, Trento, Italy. Electronic address: lavelli@fbk.eu.
(6)LIMSI-CNRS, Orsay, France. Electronic address: pz@limsi.fr.

Pharmacovigilance (PV) is defined by the World Health Organization as the 
science and activities related to the detection, assessment, understanding and 
prevention of adverse effects or any other drug-related problem. An essential 
aspect in PV is to acquire knowledge about Drug-Drug Interactions (DDIs). The 
shared tasks on DDI-Extraction organized in 2011 and 2013 have pointed out the 
importance of this issue and provided benchmarks for: Drug Name Recognition, DDI 
extraction and DDI classification. In this paper, we present our text mining 
systems for these tasks and evaluate their results on the DDI-Extraction 
benchmarks. Our systems rely on machine learning techniques using both 
feature-based and kernel-based methods. The obtained results for drug name 
recognition are encouraging. For DDI-Extraction, our hybrid system combining a 
feature-based method and a kernel-based method was ranked second in the 
DDI-Extraction-2011 challenge, and our two-step system for DDI detection and 
classification was ranked first in the DDI-Extraction-2013 task at SemEval. We 
discuss our methods and results and give pointers to future work.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.09.015
PMID: 26432353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Isr J Health Policy Res. 2019 Jun 19;8(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s13584-019-0319-3.

Pharmacovigilance strategy: opportunities for cross-national learning.

Fermont I(1).

Author information:
(1)ISOP ISRAEL: The Israeli Chapter of the International Society of 
Pharmacovigilance and IFC Ltd, Beit Haarava32, Jerusalem, Israel. 
fermont.irene@gmail.com.

The Israeli Ministry of Health has set up the foundations of a National 
Pharmacovigilance System. The next step is to adopt the best of the 
international ideas, trends and approaches which are shaping the future of 
pharmacovigilance. Specifically: 1) The risk management approach requires 
proactively preventing or minimizing risks, starting in early clinical 
development and extending all along the lifecycle of a pharmaceutical. 2) Drug 
safety is a multidisciplinary discipline where all stakeholders should be 
involved. 3) Clinical trials provide an ideal safety profile limited to the 
restrictive conditions of the trial. Only real-world data, from the post 
marketing period, will reveal the real risk/benefit balance for the use of a 
pharmaceutical in regular clinical care. 4) Artificial intelligence is needed to 
analyze the large amount of data collected through the post-marketing studies, 
electronic medical records and the internet. Many AI tools have been developed 
to support better use of pharmaceuticals. 5) Quality-oriented, thorough 
inspections and audits are critical for achieving patient safety. 6) Patients 
should be recognized as active players in their treatment who can, and should, 
have access to safety information through the major agencies' websites.Israel 
can benefit from several of its key assets to reach a higher level of 
pharmacovigilance: 1) Israel's four HMOs are organized in a way that allows them 
to have quick and efficient dialogue with healthcare professionals and with 
patients. Moreover, a new project named, Big Data in Health, will pool the 
epidemiologic databases of the HMOs, providing precious information for 
understanding risk factors, detecting alerts, and developing personalized 
medicine. 2) Formal risk management activities have long been part of the 
culture of hospitals and should be applied increasingly to ensuring drug 
safety.Israel has the organizational, scientific, technological and cultural 
resources needed to quickly overcome the challenges and go beyond its current 
state to build a unique pharmacovigilance system which could serve as an example 
for other countries.

DOI: 10.1186/s13584-019-0319-3
PMCID: PMC6582557
PMID: 31217025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that she has no competing 
interests.


300. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Aug 11;13:804566. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.804566. 
eCollection 2022.

A machine learning-based risk warning platform for potentially inappropriate 
prescriptions for elderly patients with cardiovascular disease.

Xingwei W(1)(2), Huan C(1), Mengting L(1), Lv Q(3), Jiaying Z(4), Enwu L(1)(2), 
Jiuqun Z(1)(2), Rongsheng T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Personalized Drug Therapy Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Department of 
Pharmacy, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine, University 
of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Chinese Academy of Sciences Sichuan Translational Medicine Research Hospital, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Sichuan Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Western Pharmacy, Chengdu First People's Hospital, Chengdu, 
China.

Potentially inappropriate prescribing (PIP), including potentially inappropriate 
medications (PIMs) and potential prescribing omissions (PPOs), is a major risk 
factor for adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Establishing a risk warning model for 
PIP to screen high-risk patients and implementing targeted interventions would 
significantly reduce the occurrence of PIP and adverse drug events. Elderly 
patients with cardiovascular disease hospitalized at the Sichuan Provincial 
People's Hospital were included in the study. Information about PIP, PIM, and 
PPO was obtained by reviewing patient prescriptions according to the STOPP/START 
criteria (2nd edition). Data were divided into a training set and test set at a 
ratio of 8:2. Five sampling methods, three feature screening methods, and 
eighteen machine learning algorithms were used to handle data and establish risk 
warning models. A 10-fold cross-validation method was employed for internal 
validation in the training set, and the bootstrap method was used for external 
validation in the test set. The performances were assessed by area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), and the risk warning platform was 
developed based on the best models. The contributions of features were 
interpreted using SHapley Additive ExPlanation (SHAP). A total of 404 patients 
were included in the study (318 [78.7%] with PIP; 112 [27.7%] with PIM; and 273 
[67.6%] with PPO). After data sampling and feature selection, 15 datasets were 
obtained and 270 risk warning models were built based on them to predict PIP, 
PPO, and PIM, respectively. External validation showed that the AUCs of the best 
model for PIP, PPO, and PIM were 0.8341, 0.7007, and 0.7061, respectively. The 
results suggested that angina, number of medications, number of diseases, and 
age were the key factors in the PIP risk warning model. The risk warning 
platform was established to predict PIP, PIM, and PPO, which has acceptable 
accuracy, prediction performance, and potential clinical application 
perspective.

Copyright © 2022 Xingwei, Huan, Mengting, Lv, Jiaying, Enwu, Jiuqun and 
Rongsheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.804566
PMCID: PMC9402906
PMID: 36034817

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


301. Healthc Inform Res. 2018 Jul;24(3):242-246. doi: 10.4258/hir.2018.24.3.242. Epub 
2018 Jul 31.

Construction of an Electrocardiogram Database Including 12 Lead Waveforms.

Chung D(1), Choi J(1), Jang JH(1), Kim TY(1), Byun J(1), Park H(1), Lim HS(2), 
Park RW(1)(3), Yoon D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ajou University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Electrocardiogram (ECG) data are important for the study of 
cardiovascular disease and adverse drug reactions. Although the development of 
analytical techniques such as machine learning has improved our ability to 
extract useful information from ECGs, there is a lack of easily available ECG 
data for research purposes. We previously published an article on a database of 
ECG parameters and related clinical data (ECG-ViEW), which we have now updated 
with additional 12-lead waveform information.
METHODS: All ECGs stored in portable document format (PDF) were collected from a 
tertiary teaching hospital in Korea over a 23-year study period. We developed 
software which can extract all ECG parameters and waveform information from the 
ECG reports in PDF format and stored it in a database (meta data) and a text 
file (raw waveform).
RESULTS: Our database includes all parameters (ventricular rate, PR interval, 
QRS duration, QT/QTc interval, P-R-T axes, and interpretations) and 12-lead 
waveforms (for leads I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF, V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, and V6) from 
1,039,550 ECGs (from 447,445 patients). Demographics, drug exposure data, 
diagnosis history, and laboratory test results (serum calcium, magnesium, and 
potassium levels) were also extracted from electronic medical records and linked 
to the ECG information.
CONCLUSIONS: Electrocardiogram information that includes 12 lead waveforms was 
extracted and transformed into a form that can be analyzed. The description and 
programming codes in this case report could be a reference for other researchers 
to build ECG databases using their own local ECG repository.

DOI: 10.4258/hir.2018.24.3.242
PMCID: PMC6085199
PMID: 30109157

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.


302. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2022 Apr 19;20:2112-2123. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2022.04.021. eCollection 2022.

On the road to explainable AI in drug-drug interactions prediction: A systematic 
review.

Vo TH(1), Nguyen NTK(2), Kha QH(3), Le NQK(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Master Program in Clinical Genomics and Proteomics, College of Pharmacy, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)School of Nutrition and Health Sciences, College of Nutrition, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
(3)International Master/Ph.D. Program in Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(4)Professional Master Program in Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(5)Research Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(6)Translational Imaging Research Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital, 
Taipei 110, Taiwan.

Over the past decade, polypharmacy instances have been common in multi-diseases 
treatment. However, unwanted drug-drug interactions (DDIs) that might cause 
unexpected adverse drug events (ADEs) in multiple regimens therapy remain a 
significant issue. Since artificial intelligence (AI) is ubiquitous today, many 
AI prediction models have been developed to predict DDIs to support clinicians 
in pharmacotherapy-related decisions. However, even though DDI prediction models 
have great potential for assisting physicians in polypharmacy decisions, there 
are still concerns regarding the reliability of AI models due to their black-box 
nature. Building AI models with explainable mechanisms can augment their 
transparency to address the above issue. Explainable AI (XAI) promotes safety 
and clarity by showing how decisions are made in AI models, especially in 
critical tasks like DDI predictions. In this review, a comprehensive overview of 
AI-based DDI prediction, including the publicly available source for AI-DDIs 
studies, the methods used in data manipulation and feature preprocessing, the 
XAI mechanisms to promote trust of AI, especially for critical tasks as DDIs 
prediction, the modeling methods, is provided. Limitations and the future 
directions of XAI in DDIs are also discussed.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2022.04.021
PMCID: PMC9092071
PMID: 35832629

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


303. Proc Conf AAAI Artif Intell. 2012 Jul;2012:790-793.

Identifying Adverse Drug Events by Relational Learning.

Page D(1), Costa VS(2), Natarajan S(3), Barnard A(1), Peissig P(4), Caldwell 
M(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison.
(2)CRACS-INESC TEC and FCUP.
(3)Wake Forest University.
(4)Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation.
(5)Marshfield Clinic.

The pharmaceutical industry, consumer protection groups, users of medications 
and government oversight agencies are all strongly interested in identifying 
adverse reactions to drugs. While a clinical trial of a drug may use only a 
thousand patients, once a drug is released on the market it may be taken by 
millions of patients. As a result, in many cases adverse drug events (ADEs) are 
observed in the broader population that were not identified during clinical 
trials. Therefore, there is a need for continued, post-marketing surveillance of 
drugs to identify previously-unanticipated ADEs. This paper casts this problem 
as a reverse machine learning task, related to relational subgroup discovery and 
provides an initial evaluation of this approach based on experiments with an 
actual EMR/EHR and known adverse drug events.

PMCID: PMC4063215
PMID: 24955289


304. JMIR Med Inform. 2020 Jul 10;8(7):e18417. doi: 10.2196/18417.

Extraction of Information Related to Drug Safety Surveillance From Electronic 
Health Record Notes: Joint Modeling of Entities and Relations Using 
Knowledge-Aware Neural Attentive Models.

Dandala B(1), Joopudi V(1), Tsou CH(1), Liang JJ(1), Suryanarayanan P(1).

Author information:
(1)IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, United States.

BACKGROUND: An adverse drug event (ADE) is commonly defined as "an injury 
resulting from medical intervention related to a drug." Providing information 
related to ADEs and alerting caregivers at the point of care can reduce the risk 
of prescription and diagnostic errors and improve health outcomes. ADEs captured 
in structured data in electronic health records (EHRs) as either coded problems 
or allergies are often incomplete, leading to underreporting. Therefore, it is 
important to develop capabilities to process unstructured EHR data in the form 
of clinical notes, which contain a richer documentation of a patient's ADE. 
Several natural language processing (NLP) systems have been proposed to 
automatically extract information related to ADEs. However, the results from 
these systems showed that significant improvement is still required for the 
automatic extraction of ADEs from clinical notes.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to improve the automatic extraction of ADEs and 
related information such as drugs, their attributes, and reason for 
administration from the clinical notes of patients.
METHODS: This research was conducted using discharge summaries from the Medical 
Information Mart for Intensive Care III (MIMIC-III) database obtained through 
the 2018 National NLP Clinical Challenges (n2c2) annotated with drugs, drug 
attributes (ie, strength, form, frequency, route, dosage, duration), ADEs, 
reasons, and relations between drugs and other entities. We developed a deep 
learning-based system for extracting these drug-centric concepts and relations 
simultaneously using a joint method enhanced with contextualized embeddings, a 
position-attention mechanism, and knowledge representations. The joint method 
generated different sentence representations for each drug, which were then used 
to extract related concepts and relations simultaneously. Contextualized 
representations trained on the MIMIC-III database were used to capture 
context-sensitive meanings of words. The position-attention mechanism amplified 
the benefits of the joint method by generating sentence representations that 
capture long-distance relations. Knowledge representations were obtained from 
graph embeddings created using the US Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event 
Reporting System database to improve relation extraction, especially when 
contextual clues were insufficient.
RESULTS: Our system achieved new state-of-the-art results on the n2c2 data set, 
with significant improvements in recognizing crucial drug-reason (F1=0.650 
versus F1=0.579) and drug-ADE (F1=0.490 versus F1=0.476) relations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents a system for extracting drug-centric concepts 
and relations that outperformed current state-of-the-art results and shows that 
contextualized embeddings, position-attention mechanisms, and knowledge graph 
embeddings effectively improve deep learning-based concepts and relation 
extraction. This study demonstrates the potential for deep learning-based 
methods to help extract real-world evidence from unstructured patient data for 
drug safety surveillance.

©Bharath Dandala, Venkata Joopudi, Ching-Huei Tsou, Jennifer J Liang, 
Parthasarathy Suryanarayanan. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 10.07.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/18417
PMCID: PMC7382020
PMID: 32459650

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


305. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2018 Jul 23;18(Suppl 2):51. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-018-0626-6.

Using natural language processing methods to classify use status of dietary 
supplements in clinical notes.

Fan Y(1), Zhang R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.
(2)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA. zhan1386@umn.edu.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Care & Health Systems, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. zhan1386@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Despite widespread use, the safety of dietary supplements is open to 
doubt due to the fact that they can interact with prescribed medications, 
leading to dangerous clinical outcomes. Electronic health records (EHRs) provide 
a potential way for active pharmacovigilance on dietary supplements since a fair 
amount of dietary supplement information, especially those on use status, can be 
found in clinical notes. Extracting such information is extremely significant 
for subsequent supplement safety research.
METHODS: In this study, we collected 2500 sentences for 25 commonly used dietary 
supplements and annotated into four classes: Continuing (C), Discontinued (D), 
Started (S) and Unclassified (U). Both rule-based and machine learning-based 
classifiers were developed on the same training set and evaluated using the 
hold-out test set. The performances of the two classifiers were also compared.
RESULTS: The rule-based classifier achieved F-measure of 0.90, 0.85, 0.90, and 
0.86 in C, D, S, and U status, respectively. The optimal machine learning-based 
classifier (Maximum Entropy) achieved F-measure of 0.90, 0.92, 0.91 and 0.88 in 
C, D, S, and U status, respectively. The comparison result shows that the 
machine learning-based classifier has a better performance, which is more 
efficient and scalable especially when the sample size doubles.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning-based classifier outperforms rule-based classifier 
in categorization of the use status of dietary supplements in clinical notes. 
Future work includes applying deep learning methods and developing a hybrid 
system to approach use status classification task.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-018-0626-6
PMCID: PMC6069512
PMID: 30066648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ INFORMATION: Described in the title 
page. ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Ethics approval for this study 
was obtained from the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (IRB). 
All patients were included based on their consent forms. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


306. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Oct;57:333-49. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.013. Epub 2015 
Aug 17.

Identifying adverse drug event information in clinical notes with distributional 
semantic representations of context.

Henriksson A(1), Kvist M(2), Dalianis H(3), Duneld M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm University, 
Sweden. Electronic address: aronhen@dsv.su.se.
(2)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm University, 
Sweden; Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME), 
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden. Electronic address: maria.kvist@karolinska.se.
(3)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm University, 
Sweden. Electronic address: hercules@dsv.su.se.
(4)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm University, 
Sweden. Electronic address: xmartin@dsv.su.se.

For the purpose of post-marketing drug safety surveillance, which has 
traditionally relied on the voluntary reporting of individual cases of adverse 
drug events (ADEs), other sources of information are now being explored, 
including electronic health records (EHRs), which give us access to enormous 
amounts of longitudinal observations of the treatment of patients and their drug 
use. Adverse drug events, which can be encoded in EHRs with certain diagnosis 
codes, are, however, heavily underreported. It is therefore important to develop 
capabilities to process, by means of computational methods, the more 
unstructured EHR data in the form of clinical notes, where clinicians may 
describe and reason around suspected ADEs. In this study, we report on the 
creation of an annotated corpus of Swedish health records for the purpose of 
learning to identify information pertaining to ADEs present in clinical notes. 
To this end, three key tasks are tackled: recognizing relevant named entities 
(disorders, symptoms, drugs), labeling attributes of the recognized entities 
(negation, speculation, temporality), and relationships between them 
(indication, adverse drug event). For each of the three tasks, leveraging models 
of distributional semantics - i.e., unsupervised methods that exploit 
co-occurrence information to model, typically in vector space, the meaning of 
words - and, in particular, combinations of such models, is shown to improve the 
predictive performance. The ability to make use of such unsupervised methods is 
critical when faced with large amounts of sparse and high-dimensional data, 
especially in domains where annotated resources are scarce.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.08.013
PMID: 26291578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Rev Prat. 2017 Jan;67(1):25-30.

[Using big data for disease surveillance and drug safety monitoring].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Flahault A(1)(2), Salathé M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut de santé globale, université de Genève, Genève, Suisse.
(2)Centre Virchow-Villermé, université Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.
(3)Digital Epidemiology Lab, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Suisse.

Using big data for disease surveillance and drug safety monitoring. The ongoing 
global growth in internet usage and data sharing has generated tremendous 
amounts of "big data" that can be analyzed for public health purposes. In 
addition to electronic medical records, new paradigms are emerging, leveraging 
the combination of patient-generated data with data from traditional health 
systems. As the two data sources have complementary strengths - high veracity in 
the data from traditional sources, high velocity and variety in the data from 
patient-generated data - they can be combined to build more robust public health 
systems. Here, we will focus on two areas of public health: infectious disease 
surveillance, and adverse drug event monitoring. The problem with these data 
sources are that they are completely unstructured and highly context-dependent, 
posing essentially a machine learning challenge. Some of the recent examples in 
these two domains indicate that the technical challenges can be solved, but as 
long as the two systems are separate, they will be constrained by their 
intrinsic limits.

Publisher: Quelles perspectives pour l’utilisation des big data ? L’actuelle 
croissance de l’utilisation d’Internet et le partage de plus en plus répandu des 
données ont généré une production massive d’informations qui pourraient être 
mieux utilisées dans le champ de la santé publique. En plus des dossiers 
médicaux informatisés, l’intérêt pour de nouveaux modes d’utilisation des 
données est en train d’émerger, cherchant à associer les sources de données 
traditionnelles aux données produites par les patients euxmêmes. Les deux 
sources de données ont chacune leurs forces : plus grande validité des données 
issues des sources traditionnelles ; accès plus rapide et origines plus variées 
des données générées par les patients. Combinés, ces flux d’informations peuvent 
contribuer à renforcer le système de santé. Cet article présente deux champs 
importants de la santé publique : la veille sanitaire et la sécurité sanitaire 
des produits de santé (ou pharmacovigilance). L’un des problèmes rencontrés avec 
ces données massives (big data) est leur polymorphisme, et les limites 
contextuelles de leur interprétation, posant des défis technologiques en termes 
d’algorithmes d’auto-apprentissage (machine learning). Il y a plusieurs cas dans 
les domaines étudiés qui montrent que l’on a su relever ces défis avec plus ou 
moins de succès, même si le fossé qui sépare encore ces deux sources de données 
rend complexes les analyses et les interprétations que l’on peut encore en faire 
aujourd’hui.

PMID: 30512429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs déclarent n’avoir aucun lien 
d'intérêts.


308. J Psychiatr Res. 2020 Dec;131:144-151. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.08.033. 
Epub 2020 Aug 29.

Is Fidgety Philip's ground truth also ours? The creation and application of a 
machine learning algorithm.

Beyzaei N(1), Bao S(1), Bu Y(2), Hung L(3), Hussaina H(1), Maher KS(1), Chan 
M(1), Garn H(4), Kloesch G(5), Kohn B(6), Kuzeljevic B(7), McWilliams S(1), 
Spruyt K(8), Tse E(1), Machiel Van der Loos HF(9), Kuo C(10), Ipsiroglu OS(11).

Author information:
(1)H-Behaviours Research Lab, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)H-Behaviours Research Lab, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Applied 
Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)H-Behaviours Research Lab, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Education and 
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Austrian Institute of Technology, Austria.
(5)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Education and Department of Computer 
Science, Faculty of Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(7)Clinical Research Support Unit, BC Children' Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(8)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Paris, 
France.
(9)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(10)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Education and Department of Computer 
Science, Faculty of Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. Electronic address: calvin.kuo@ubc.ca.
(11)H-Behaviours Research Lab, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: 
oipsiroglu@bcchr.ca.

BACKGROUND: Behavioral observations support clinical in-depth phenotyping but 
phenotyping and pattern recognition are affected by training background. As 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Restless Legs syndrome/Willis Ekbom 
disease and medication induced activation syndromes (including increased 
irritability and/or akathisia), present with hyperactive-behaviors with 
hyper-arousability and/or hypermotor-restlessness (H-behaviors), we first 
developed a non-interpretative, neutral pictogram-guided phenotyping language 
(PG-PL) for describing body-segment movements during sitting.
METHODOLOGY & RESULTS: The PG-PL was applied for annotating 12 1-min 
sitting-videos (inter-observer agreements >85%->97%) and these manual 
annotations were used as a ground truth to develop an automated algorithm using 
OpenPose, which locates skeletal landmarks in 2D video. We evaluated the 
algorithm's performance against the ground truth by computing the area under the 
receiver operator curve (>0.79 for the legs, arms, and feet, but 0.65 for the 
head). While our pixel displacement algorithm performed well for the legs, arms, 
and feet, it predicted head motion less well, indicating the need for further 
investigations.
CONCLUSION: This first automated analysis algorithm allows to start the 
discussion about distinct phenotypical characteristics of H-behaviors during 
structured behavioral observations and may support differential diagnostic 
considerations via in-depth phenotyping of sitting behaviors and, in 
consequence, of better treatment concepts.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.08.033
PMID: 32971358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2019 Jun 3;5(2):e11264. doi: 10.2196/11264.

Early Detection of Adverse Drug Reactions in Social Health Networks: A Natural 
Language Processing Pipeline for Signal Detection.

Nikfarjam A(#)(1), Ransohoff JD(#)(1), Callahan A(#)(1), Jones E(2), Loew B(2), 
Kwong BY(3), Sarin KY(3), Shah NH(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford Department of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.
(2)Inspire, Arlington, VA, United States.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) occur in nearly all patients on 
chemotherapy, causing morbidity and therapy disruptions. Detection of such ADRs 
is limited in clinical trials, which are underpowered to detect rare events. 
Early recognition of ADRs in the postmarketing phase could substantially reduce 
morbidity and decrease societal costs. Internet community health forums provide 
a mechanism for individuals to discuss real-time health concerns and can enable 
computational detection of ADRs.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study is to identify cutaneous ADR signals in social 
health networks and compare the frequency and timing of these ADRs to clinical 
reports in the literature.
METHODS: We present a natural language processing-based, ADR signal-generation 
pipeline based on patient posts on Internet social health networks. We 
identified user posts from the Inspire health forums related to two chemotherapy 
classes: erlotinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor, and nivolumab 
and pembrolizumab, immune checkpoint inhibitors. We extracted mentions of ADRs 
from unstructured content of patient posts. We then performed population-level 
association analyses and time-to-detection analyses.
RESULTS: Our system detected cutaneous ADRs from patient reports with high 
precision (0.90) and at frequencies comparable to those documented in the 
literature but an average of 7 months ahead of their literature reporting. Known 
ADRs were associated with higher proportional reporting ratios compared to 
negative controls, demonstrating the robustness of our analyses. Our named 
entity recognition system achieved a 0.738 microaveraged F-measure in detecting 
ADR entities, not limited to cutaneous ADRs, in health forum posts. 
Additionally, we discovered the novel ADR of hypohidrosis reported by 23 
patients in erlotinib-related posts; this ADR was absent from 15 years of 
literature on this medication and we recently reported the finding in a clinical 
oncology journal.
CONCLUSIONS: Several hundred million patients report health concerns in social 
health networks, yet this information is markedly underutilized for 
pharmacosurveillance. We demonstrated the ability of a natural language 
processing-based signal-generation pipeline to accurately detect patient reports 
of ADRs months in advance of literature reporting and the robustness of 
statistical analyses to validate system detections. Our findings suggest the 
important contributions that social health network data can play in contributing 
to more comprehensive and timely pharmacovigilance.

©Azadeh Nikfarjam, Julia D Ransohoff, Alison Callahan, Erik Jones, Brian Loew, 
Bernice Y Kwong, Kavita Y Sarin, Nigam H Shah. Originally published in JMIR 
Public Health and Surveillance (http://publichealth.jmir.org), 03.06.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/11264
PMCID: PMC6684218
PMID: 31162134

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: BYK serves as a 
consultant to Genentech and Roche. 


310. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015 Nov;22(6):1196-204. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv102. Epub 
2015 Jul 31.

A method for systematic discovery of adverse drug events from clinical notes.

Wang G(1), Jung K(1), Winnenburg R(1), Shah NH(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, Center for Biomedical Informatics, Stanford, California, 
USA guanw@stanford.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Adverse drug events (ADEs) are undesired harmful effects resulting 
from use of a medication, and occur in 30% of hospitalized patients. The authors 
have developed a data-mining method for systematic, automated detection of ADEs 
from electronic medical records.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This method uses the text from 9.5 million clinical 
notes, along with prior knowledge of drug usages and known ADEs, as inputs. 
These inputs are further processed into statistics used by a discriminative 
classifier which outputs the probability that a given drug-disorder pair 
represents a valid ADE association. Putative ADEs identified by the classifier 
are further filtered for positive support in 2 independent, complementary data 
sources. The authors evaluate this method by assessing support for the 
predictions in other curated data sources, including a manually curated, 
time-indexed reference standard of label change events.
RESULTS: This method uses a classifier that achieves an area under the curve of 
0.94 on a held out test set. The classifier is used on 2,362,950 possible 
drug-disorder pairs comprised of 1602 unique drugs and 1475 unique disorders for 
which we had data, resulting in 240 high-confidence, well-supported drug-AE 
associations. Eighty-seven of them (36%) are supported in at least one of the 
resources that have information that was not available to the classifier.
CONCLUSION: This method demonstrates the feasibility of systematic 
post-marketing surveillance for ADEs using electronic medical records, a key 
component of the learning healthcare system.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocv102
PMCID: PMC4921953
PMID: 26232442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biomed Inform. 2020 Oct;110:103568. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103568. Epub 2020 
Sep 14.

Learning structured medical information from social media.

Hasan A(1), Levene M(2), Weston D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck, University 
of London, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
abulhasan@dcs.bbk.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck, University 
of London, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
mlevene@dcs.bbk.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck, University 
of London, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
dweston@dcs.bbk.ac.uk.

Our goal is to summarise and aggregate information from social media regarding 
the symptoms of a disease, the drugs used and the treatment effects both 
positive and negative. To achieve this we first apply a supervised machine 
learning method to automatically extract medical concepts from natural language 
text. In an environment such as social media, where new data is continuously 
streamed, we need a methodology that will allow us to continuously train with 
the new data. To attain such incremental re-training, a semi-supervised 
methodology is developed, which is capable of learning new concepts from a small 
set of labelled data together with the much larger set of unlabelled data. The 
semi-supervised methodology deploys a conditional random field (CRF) as the 
base-line training algorithm for extracting medical concepts. The methodology 
iteratively augments to the training set sentences having high confidence, and 
adds terms to existing dictionaries to be used as features with the base-line 
model for further classification. Our empirical results show that the base-line 
CRF performs strongly across a range of different dictionary and training sizes; 
when the base-line is built with the full training data the F1 score reaches the 
range 84%-90%. Moreover, we show that the semi-supervised method produces a mild 
but significant improvement over the base-line. We also discuss the significance 
of the potential improvement of the semi-supervised methodology and found that 
it is significantly more accurate in most cases than the underlying base-line 
model.

Crown Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103568
PMID: 32942027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Ther Adv Drug Saf. 2021 Feb 10;12:2042098620985991. doi: 
10.1177/2042098620985991. eCollection 2021.

Pharmacovigilance and the digital world in Italy: presentation of the results of 
a national survey.

Stagi L(1), Bocchi I(2), Bianco S(3), Sirizzotti G(4), Bernardini D(5), 
Calderazzo V(6), Pirisino G(7), Grisoni I(8), Romano S(9).

Author information:
(1)Roche, Monza, Lombardia, Italy.
(2)Bayer S.p.A, Viale Certosa 130, Milano, 20156, Italy.
(3)AKROS BioScience S.r.l., Pomezia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Drug Safety, Biogen Italia, Milano, Lombardia, Italy.
(5)Novartis Farma Italia, Origgio, Lombardia, Italy.
(6)Boehringer Ingelheim Italia, Milano, Lombardia, Italy.
(7)Astellas Pharma Italy, Carugate, Lombardia, Italy.
(8)EEA QPPV, Jazz Pharmaceuticals.
(9)Sanofi S.p.A., Milano, Lombardia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The digital world has undergone an essential metamorphosis in recent 
years, making the easy sharing of information possible, including those related 
to pharmacovigilance and the safety aspects of pharmaceutical and other 
healthcare products. These new interactive ways pose both opportunities and 
challenges to healthcare/pharmaceutical companies. The Pharmacovigilance Working 
Group "Ernesto Montagna" of the Italian Society of Pharmaceutical Medicine 
(SIMeF) decided to carry out a survey to gain a better understanding of the role 
of pharmacovigilance in digital activities.
METHODS: The Pharmacovigilance Working Group "Ernesto Montagna" sent a 
questionnaire via Computer-Assisted Web Interview (CAWI) technology to the 
members of the Pharmacovigilance Working Group (N = 257). The questionnaire was 
composed of 11 questions in four clusters exploring: (i) digital channels and 
projects implemented by the healthcare/pharmaceutical companies; (ii) governance 
tools in place for digital channels and projects; (iii) management of adverse 
events collected from digital channels and projects; (iv) impact of artificial 
intelligence on pharmacovigilance activities.
RESULTS: Ninety-three members of the Group "Ernesto Montagna" completed the 
questionnaire. The results show that, in the panorama of Italian 
healthcare/pharmaceutical companies, digital activities are ongoing, but there 
are still areas of uncertainty: on when a pharmacovigilance team should be 
involved, on the governance tools and on the guidance to be used to ensure 
effective governance of digital projects.
CONCLUSION: In a scenario which is evolving very quickly, a critical factor is 
the availability of specific and updated regulations. Scientific societies, such 
as SIMeF and Farmindustria, the Italian national Pharma-Companies Association, 
could give a valuable contribution to the development of appropriate guidance 
together with the competent authorities.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Results of an Italian survey on pharmacovigilance and 
digital world Background: The digital world allows and makes the sharing of 
information easy, including information related to the health status of patients 
and side effects of drugs. Healthcare/pharmaceutical companies are faced with 
both opportunities and challenges provided by such new ways of interaction among 
patients and healthcare professionals. The Pharmacovigilance Working Group 
"Ernesto Montagna" of the Italian Society of Pharmaceutical Medicine (SIMeF) 
carried out a survey to gain a better understanding of the role of 
pharmacovigilance in digital activities.Methods: The Pharmacovigilance Working 
Group "Ernesto Montagna" distributed a questionnaire to the 257 members of the 
Pharmacovigilance Working Group. The questionnaire was composed of 11 questions 
exploring: (i) digital channels and projects implemented by the companies; (ii) 
governance tools in place for digital channels and projects; (iii) management of 
adverse events collected from digital channels and projects; (iv) impact of 
artificial intelligence on pharmacovigilance activities.Results: Ninety-three 
members completed the questionnaire. The results show that digital activities 
are ongoing in the Italian healthcare/pharmaceutical companies. Despite this, 
there are still areas of uncertainty, in particular: on when pharmacovigilance 
team should be involved and on the tools and guidance to be used to ensure 
effective governance of digital projects.Conclusion: In a scenario that is 
evolving very quickly, an important factor is represented by the availability of 
straightforward and updated pharma-regulations and guidelines. Scientific 
societies like SIMeF and Farmindustria, the Italian national Pharma-Companies 
Association, could give a valuable contribution to the development of 
appropriate guidance together with the qualified authorities, in order to 
coordinate and standardize the approach among pharmaceutical companies.

© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/2042098620985991
PMCID: PMC7878998
PMID: 33623659

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.


313. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Jun;94:103205. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103205. Epub 2019 
May 11.

A distant supervision based approach to medical persona classification.

Pattisapu N(1), Gupta M(2), Kumaraguru P(3), Varma V(4).

Author information:
(1)Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab, Kohli Center for Intelligent 
Systems, International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, 500032, 
India. Electronic address: nikhil.pattisapu@research.iiit.ac.in.
(2)Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab, Kohli Center for Intelligent 
Systems, International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, 500032, 
India. Electronic address: manish.gupta@iiit.ac.in.
(3)Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab, Kohli Center for Intelligent 
Systems, International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, 500032, 
India. Electronic address: pk.guru@iiit.ac.in.
(4)Information Retrieval and Extraction Lab, Kohli Center for Intelligent 
Systems, International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, 500032, 
India. Electronic address: vv@iiit.ac.in.

Identifying medical persona from a social media post is critical for drug 
marketing, pharmacovigilance and patient recruitment. Medical persona 
classification aims to computationally model the medical persona associated with 
a social media post. We present a novel deep learning model for this task which 
consists of two parts: Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which extract 
highly relevant features from the sentences of a social media post and average 
pooling, which aggregates the sentence embeddings to obtain task-specific 
document embedding. We compare our approach against standard baselines, such as 
Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), averaged word embedding 
based methods and popular neural architectures, such as CNN-Long Short Term 
Memory (CNN-LSTM) and Hierarchical Attention Networks (HANs). Our model achieves 
an improvement of 19.7% for classification accuracy and 20.1% for micro F1 
measure over the current state-of-the-art. We eliminate the need for manual 
labeling by employing a distant supervision based method to obtain labeled 
examples for training the models. We thoroughly analyze our model to discover 
cues that are indicative of a particular persona. Particularly, we use first 
derivative saliency to identify the salient words in a particular social media 
post.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103205
PMID: 31085324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Clin Mol Allergy. 2017 Apr 13;15:10. doi: 10.1186/s12948-017-0066-3. eCollection 
2017.

The soft computing-based approach to investigate allergic diseases: a systematic 
review.

Tartarisco G(1), Tonacci A(2), Minciullo PL(3), Billeci L(2), Pioggia G(1), 
Incorvaia C(4), Gangemi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Messina Unit, National Research Council of Italy (CNR)-Institute of Applied 
Science and Intelligent System (ISASI), Messina, Italy.
(2)Pisa Unit, National Research Council of Italy (CNR)-Institute of Clinical 
Physiology (IFC), Pisa, Italy.
(3)School and Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Hospital "G. Martino", Messina, 
Italy.
(4)Cardiac/Pulmonary Rehabilitation, ASST PINI/CTO, Via Bignami 1, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Early recognition of inflammatory markers and their relation to 
asthma, adverse drug reactions, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis and other 
allergic diseases is an important goal in allergy. The vast majority of studies 
in the literature are based on classic statistical methods; however, 
developments in computational techniques such as soft computing-based approaches 
hold new promise in this field.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this manuscript is to systematically review the main soft 
computing-based techniques such as artificial neural networks, support vector 
machines, bayesian networks and fuzzy logic to investigate their performances in 
the field of allergic diseases.
METHODS: The review was conducted following PRISMA guidelines and the protocol 
was registered within PROSPERO database (CRD42016038894). The research was 
performed on PubMed and ScienceDirect, covering the period starting from 
September 1, 1990 through April 19, 2016.
RESULTS: The review included 27 studies related to allergic diseases and soft 
computing performances. We observed promising results with an overall accuracy 
of 86.5%, mainly focused on asthmatic disease. The review reveals that soft 
computing-based approaches are suitable for big data analysis and can be very 
powerful, especially when dealing with uncertainty and poorly characterized 
parameters. Furthermore, they can provide valuable support in case of lack of 
data and entangled cause-effect relationships, which make it difficult to assess 
the evolution of disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Although most works deal with asthma, we believe the soft computing 
approach could be a real breakthrough and foster new insights into other 
allergic diseases as well.

DOI: 10.1186/s12948-017-0066-3
PMCID: PMC5390370
PMID: 28413358


315. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 29;13:867946. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.867946. eCollection 
2022.

DILI (C) : An AI-Based Classifier to Search for Drug-Induced Liver Injury 
Literature.

Rathee S(1), MacMahon M(1)(2), Liu A(1)(3), Katritsis NM(1)(4), Youssef G(1), 
Hwang W(1), Wollman L(1), Han N(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Milner Therapeutics Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(2)LifeArc, Stevenage, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Centre for Molecular Informatics, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Cambridge Centre for AI in Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a class of adverse drug reactions (ADR) that 
causes problems in both clinical and research settings. It is the most frequent 
cause of acute liver failure in the majority of Western countries and is a major 
cause of attrition of novel drug candidates. Manual trawling of the literature 
is the main route of deriving information on DILI from research studies. This 
makes it an inefficient process prone to human error. Therefore, an automatized 
AI model capable of retrieving DILI-related articles from the huge ocean of 
literature could be invaluable for the drug discovery community. In this study, 
we built an artificial intelligence (AI) model combining the power of natural 
language processing (NLP) and machine learning (ML) to address this problem. 
This model uses NLP to filter out meaningless text (e.g., stop words) and uses 
customized functions to extract relevant keywords such as singleton, pair, and 
triplet. These keywords are processed by an apriori pattern mining algorithm to 
extract relevant patterns which are used to estimate initial weightings for a ML 
classifier. Along with pattern importance and frequency, an FDA-approved drug 
list mentioning DILI adds extra confidence in classification. The combined power 
of these methods builds a DILI classifier (DILI C ), with 94.91% 
cross-validation and 94.14% external validation accuracy. To make DILI C as 
accessible as possible, including to researchers without coding experience, an R 
Shiny app capable of classifying single or multiple entries for DILI is 
developed to enhance ease of user experience and made available at 
https://researchmind.co.uk/diliclassifier/. Additionally, a GitHub link 
(https://github.com/sanjaysinghrathi/DILI-Classifier) for app source code and 
ISMB extended video talk (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j305yIVi_f8) are 
available as supplementary materials.

Copyright © 2022 Rathee, MacMahon, Liu, Katritsis, Youssef, Hwang, Wollman and 
Han.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.867946
PMCID: PMC9277181
PMID: 35846129

Conflict of interest statement: Author MM was employed by LifeArc. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


316. Pharmacogenomics. 2020 Jan;21(2):141-156. doi: 10.2217/pgs-2019-0134. Epub 2020 
Jan 17.

Pharmacogenomics at the center of precision medicine: challenges and perspective 
in an era of Big Data.

Primorac D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8), Bach-Rojecky L(9), Vađunec D(9), Juginović 
A(2), Žunić K(10), Matišić V(11), Skelin A(1)(12), Arsov B(11), Boban L(11), 
Erceg D(1)(7)(8)(13), Ivkošić IE(1)(8), Molnar V(11), Ćatić J(1)(5)(14), Mikula 
I(1)(15), Boban L(16), Primorac L(17), Esquivel B(18), Donaldson M(18).

Author information:
(1)St Catherine Specialty Hospital, 10000 Zagreb & 49210 Zabok, Croatia.
(2)University of Split School of Medicine, 21 000 Split, Croatia.
(3)Eberly College of Science, 517 Thomas St, State College, Penn State 
University, PA 16803, USA.
(4)The Henry C Lee College of Criminal Justice & Forensic Sciences, University 
of New Haven, West Haven, CT 06516, USA.
(5)University of Osijek School of Medicine, 31000 Osijek, Croatia.
(6)University of Rijeka School of Medicine, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.
(7)Srebrnjak Children's Hospital, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(8)University of Osijek Faculty of Dental Medicine & Health, 31000 Osijek, 
Croatia.
(9)University of Zagreb Faculty of Pharmacy & Biochemistry, 10000 Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(10)PLIVA Hrvatska, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(11)University of Zagreb School of Medicine, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(12)Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(13)Croatian Catholic University, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(14)Clinical Hospital Dubrava, Department of Cardiology, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(15)University North, Nursing Department, 42000 Varaždin, Croatia.
(16)Children's Hospital Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(17)Wharton Business School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(18)OneOme LLC, Minneapolis, MN 55413, USA.

Pharmacogenomics (PGx) is one of the core elements of personalized medicine. PGx 
information reduces the likelihood of adverse drug reactions and optimizes 
therapeutic efficacy. St Catherine Specialty Hospital in Zagreb/Zabok, Croatia 
has implemented a personalized patient approach using the RightMed® 
Comprehensive PGx panel of 25 pharmacogenes plus Facor V Leiden, Factor II and 
MTHFR genes, which is interpreted by a special counseling team to offer the best 
quality of care. With the advent of significant technological advances comes 
another challenge: how can we harness the data to inform clinically actionable 
measures and how can we use it to develop better predictive risk models? We 
propose to apply the principles artificial intelligence to develop a medication 
optimization platform to prevent, manage and treat different diseases.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs-2019-0134
PMID: 31950879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 May 25;294:878-879. doi: 10.3233/SHTI220615.

Named Entity Recognition in Pubmed Abstracts for Pharmacovigilance Using Deep 
Learning.

Nghiem TT(1), Bousquet C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Thermal, Mechanical and Material Sciences (ITheMM EA 7548), 
University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, 51687 Reims, France.
(2)Unit of public health and medical informatics, CHU de Saint Etienne, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Inserm, université Paris 13, Laboratoire d'informatique 
médicale et d'ingénierie des connaissances en e-santé, LIMICS, F-75006 Paris, 
France.

Methods of natural language processing associated with machine learning or deep 
learning can support detection of adverse drug reactions in abstracts of case 
reports available on Pubmed. In 2012, Gurulingappa et al. proposed a training 
set for the recognition of named entities corresponding to drugs and adverse 
reactions on 3000 Pubmed abstracts. We implemented a classifier using deep 
learning with a Bi-LSTM and a CRF layer that achieves an F-measure of 87.8%. 
Perspectives consist in using BERT for improving the classifier, and applying it 
to a large number of Pubmed abstract to build a database of case reports 
available in the literature.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI220615
PMID: 35612234


318. Inform Health Soc Care. 2022 Jan 20:1-10. doi: 10.1080/17538157.2021.2024835. 
Online ahead of print.

Identifying the underlying factors associated with antidepressant drug 
discontinuation: content analysis of patients' drug reviews.

Alarifi M(1)(2), Jabour A(3), Foy DM(4), Zolnoori M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Health Informatics & Administration, College of Health 
Sciences, University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Health Informatics Department, Faculty of Public Health and Tropical 
Medicine, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pharmacy and Therapeutics, Pharmacy College, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Section of Medical Informatics, Department of Health Science Research, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The rate of antidepressant prescriptions is globally increasing. A large portion 
of patients stop their medications, which could lead to many side effects 
including relapse, and anxiety. The aim of this was to develop a drug-continuity 
prediction model and identify the factors associated with drug-continuity using 
online patient forums. We retrieved 982 antidepressant drug reviews from the 
online patient's forum AskaPatient.com. We followed the Analytical Framework 
Method to extract structured data from unstructured data. Using the structured 
data, we examined the factors associated with antidepressant discontinuity and 
developed a predictive model using multiple machine learning techniques. We 
tested multiple machine learning techniques which resulted in different 
performances ranging from accuracy of 65% to 82%. We found that Random Forest 
algorithm provides the highest prediction method with 82% Accuracy, 78% 
Precision, 88.03% Recall, and 84.2% F1-Score. The factors associated with drug 
discontinuity the most were: withdrawal symptoms, effectiveness-ineffectiveness, 
perceived-distress-adverse drug reaction, rating, and perceiveddistress related 
to withdrawal symptoms. Although the nature of data available at online forums 
differ from data collected through surveys, we found that online patients forum 
can be a valuable source of data for drug continuity prediction and 
understanding patients experience. The factors identified through our techniques 
were consistent with the findings of prior studies that used surveys.

DOI: 10.1080/17538157.2021.2024835
PMID: 35050827


319. J Toxicol Sci. 2022;47(3):89-98. doi: 10.2131/jts.47.89.

Development of in silico prediction models for drug-induced liver malignant 
tumors based on the activity of molecular initiating events: Biologically 
interpretable features.

Kurosaki K(1), Uesawa Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Informatics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University.

Liver malignant tumors (LMTs) have recently been reported as severe and 
life-threatening adverse drug events associated with drug-induced liver injury 
(DILI). DILIs are the most common adverse drug event and can cause the 
withdrawal of medicinal products or major regulatory action. To reduce the 
attrition rate and cost of drug discovery, various quantitative 
structure-toxicity relationship models have been proposed to predict the 
probability of a DILI based on the chemical structure of a drug. However, there 
are many unresolved issues regarding the predictors of LMT-inducing drugs, and 
biologically interpretable prediction models for LMT have not been developed. 
Here, we constructed prediction models for whether a drug is LMT-inducing based 
on the activity of molecular initiating events (MIEs), which are biologically 
interpretable features and are defined as the initial interaction between a 
molecule and biosystem. We then constructed five machine learning models (i.e., 
LightGBM, XGBoost, random forest, neural network, and support vector machine) 
and evaluated their predictive performances. LightGBM achieved the best 
performance among the tested models. The MIEs making the highest contribution to 
the model construction for drug-induced LMT were inducement of Enhanced Level of 
Genome Instability Gene 1 (human ATAD5), nuclear factor-κ B, and activation of 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor. These results support the previous 
literature and can be related to the mechanism onset of drug-induced LMT. Our 
findings may provide useful knowledge for drug development, research, and 
regulatory decision-making and will contribute to building more accurate and 
meaningful DILI prediction models by increasing understanding of biological 
predictors.

DOI: 10.2131/jts.47.89
PMID: 35236804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Front Artif Intell. 2021 May 26;4:659622. doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.659622. 
eCollection 2021.

InferBERT: A Transformer-Based Causal Inference Framework for Enhancing 
Pharmacovigilance.

Wang X(1), Xu X(1), Tong W(2), Roberts R(3)(4), Liu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Science, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, 
Little Rock, AR, United States.
(2)FDA/National Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR, United States.
(3)ApconiX Ltd, Alderley Park, Alderley Edge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.

Background: T ransformer-based language models have delivered clear improvements 
in a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, those 
models have a significant limitation; specifically, they cannot infer causality, 
a prerequisite for deployment in pharmacovigilance, and health care. Therefore, 
these transformer-based language models should be developed to infer causality 
to address the key question of the cause of a clinical outcome. Results: In this 
study, we propose an innovative causal inference model-InferBERT, by integrating 
the A Lite Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (ALBERT) and 
Judea Pearl's Do-calculus to establish potential causality in pharmacovigilance. 
Two FDA Adverse Event Reporting System case studies, including 
Analgesics-related acute liver failure and Tramadol-related mortalities, were 
employed to evaluate the proposed InferBERT model. The InferBERT model yielded 
accuracies of 0.78 and 0.95 for identifying Analgesics-related acute liver 
failure and Tramadol-related death cases, respectively. Meanwhile, the inferred 
causes of the two clinical outcomes, (i.e. acute liver failure and death) were 
highly consistent with clinical knowledge. Furthermore, inferred causes were 
organized into a causal tree using the proposed recursive do-calculus algorithm 
to improve the model's understanding of causality. Moreover, the high 
reproducibility of the proposed InferBERT model was demonstrated by a robustness 
assessment. Conclusion: The empirical results demonstrated that the proposed 
InferBERT approach is able to both predict clinical events and to infer their 
causes. Overall, the proposed InferBERT model is a promising approach to 
establish causal effects behind text-based observational data to enhance our 
understanding of intrinsic causality. Availability and implementation: The 
InferBERT model and preprocessed FAERS data sets are available on GitHub at 
https://github.com/XingqiaoWang/DeepCausalPV-master.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Xu, Tong, Roberts and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/frai.2021.659622
PMCID: PMC8202286
PMID: 34136800

Conflict of interest statement: RR is co-founder and co-director of ApconiX, an 
integrated toxicology and ion channel company that provides expert advice on 
non-clinical aspects of drug discovery and drug development to academia, 
industry, and not-for-profit organizations. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


321. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2020 Jun 16;270:1227-1228. doi: 10.3233/SHTI200375.

Classification of the Severity of Adverse Drugs Reactions.

Chauvet R(1)(2), Bousquet C(1), Lillo-Lelouet A(3), Zana I(1), Ben Kimoun I(1), 
Jaulent MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Université Paris 13, Laboratoire d'Informatique 
Médicale et d'Ingénierie des Connaissances en e-Santé, Paris, France.
(2)EISTI, International Engineering School, 95000 Cergy-Pontoise, France.
(3)Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.

This poster presents a non-exhaustive study of machine learning classification 
algorithms on pharmacovigilance data. In this study, we have taken into account 
the patient's clinical data such as medical history, medications taken and their 
indications for prescriptions, and the observed side effects. From these 
elements we determine whether the patient case is considered serious or not. We 
show the performances of the different algorithms by their precision, recall and 
accuracy as well as their learning curves.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI200375
PMID: 32570592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Biochem Pharmacol. 2018 Oct;156:10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2018.07.043. Epub 2018 
Aug 2.

Lamisil (terbinafine) toxicity: Determining pathways to bioactivation through 
computational and experimental approaches.

Barnette DA(1), Davis MA(1), Dang NL(2), Pidugu AS(3), Hughes T(2), Swamidass 
SJ(2), Boysen G(4), Miller GP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 
63130, United States.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Behavioral Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA 30322, United States.
(4)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, United States.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, United States. Electronic address: 
MillerGroverP@uams.edu.

Lamisil (terbinafine) may cause idiosyncratic liver toxicity through a proposed 
toxicological mechanism involving the reactive metabolite 
6,6-dimethyl-2-hepten-4-ynal (TBF-A). TBF-A toxicological relevance remains 
unclear due to a lack of identification of pathways leading to and competing 
with TBF-A formation. We resolved this knowledge gap by combining computational 
modeling and experimental kinetics of in vitro hepatic N-dealkylation of 
terbinafine. A deep learning model of N-dealkylation predicted a high 
probability for N-demethylation to yield desmethyl-terbinafine followed by 
N-dealkylation to TBF-A and marginal contributions from other possible pathways. 
We carried out steady-state kinetic experiments with pooled human liver 
microsomes that relied on development of labeling methods to expand metabolite 
characterization. Those efforts revealed high levels of TBF-A formation and 
first order decay during metabolic reactions; actual TBF-A levels would then 
reflect the balance between those processes as well as reflect the impact of 
stabilizing adduction with glutathione and other biological molecules. Modeling 
predictions and experimental studies agreed on the significance of 
N-demethylation and insignificance of N-denaphthylation in terbinafine 
metabolism, yet differed on importance of direct TBF-A formation. Under 
steady-state conditions, the direct pathway was the most important source of the 
reactive metabolite with a Vmax/Km of 4.0 pmol/min/mg protein/µM in contrast to 
model predictions. Nevertheless, previous studies show that therapeutic dosing 
leads to accumulation of desmethyl-terbinafine in plasma, which means that 
likely sources for TBF-A would draw from metabolism of both the major metabolite 
and parent drug based on our modeling and experimental studies. Through this 
combination of novel modeling and experimental approaches, we are the first to 
identify pathways leading to generation of TBF-A for assessing its role in 
idiosyncratic adverse drug interactions.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2018.07.043
PMCID: PMC6188815
PMID: 30076845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.


323. J Clin Med. 2022 Aug 12;11(16):4715. doi: 10.3390/jcm11164715.

Novel Method for Early Prediction of Clinically Significant Drug-Drug 
Interactions with a Machine Learning Algorithm Based on Risk Matrix Analysis in 
the NICU.

Yalçın N(1), Kaşıkcı M(2), Çelik HT(3), Allegaert K(4)(5)(6), Demirkan K(1), 
Yiğit Ş(3), Yurdakök M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara 06100, Turkey.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara 06100, Turkey.
(3)Division of Neonatology, Department of Child Health and Diseases, Faculty of 
Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara 06100, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, KU Leuven, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Department of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 GA Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Aims: Evidence for drug-drug interactions (DDIs) that may cause age-dependent 
differences in the incidence and severity of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in 
newborns is sparse. We aimed to develop machine learning (ML) algorithms that 
predict DDI presence by integrating each DDI, which is objectively evaluated 
with the scales in a risk matrix (probability + severity). Methods: This 
double-center, prospective randomized cohort study included neonates admitted to 
the neonatal intensive care unit in a tertiary referral hospital during the 
17-month study period. Drugs were classified by the Anatomical Therapeutic 
Chemical (ATC) classification and assessed for potential and clinically relevant 
DDIs to risk analyses with the Drug Interaction Probability Scale (DIPS, causal 
probability) and the Lexicomp® DDI (severity) database. Results: A total of 412 
neonates (median (interquartile range) gestational age of 37 (4) weeks) were 
included with 32,925 patient days, 131 different medications, and 11,908 
medication orders. Overall, at least one potential DDI was observed in 125 
(30.4%) of the patients (2.6 potential DDI/patient). A total of 38 of these 125 
patients had clinically relevant DDIs causing adverse drug reactions (2.0 
clinical DDI/patient). The vast majority of these DDIs (90.66%) were assessed to 
be at moderate risk. The performance of the ML algorithms that predicts of the 
presence of relevant DDI was as follows: accuracy 0.944 (95% CI 0.888-0.972), 
sensitivity 0.892 (95% CI 0.769-0.962), F1 score 0.904, and AUC 0.929 (95% CI 
0.874-0.983). Conclusions: In clinical practice, it is expected that 
optimization in treatment can be achieved with the implementation of this 
high-performance web tool, created to predict DDIs before they occur with a 
newborn-centered approach.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11164715
PMCID: PMC9410171
PMID: 36012954

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


324. Consult Pharm. 2017 Sep 1;32(9):535-546. doi: 10.4140/TCP.n.2017.535.

Tamoxifen Pharmacovigilance: Implications for Safe Use in the Future.

Antimisiaris D, Bae KG, Morton L, Gully Z.

OBJECTIVE: To survey the status of current tamoxifen pharmacovigilance 
documentation reflecting tamoxifen use in an academic outpatient multispecialty 
practice in older adults. This data will help provide information to develop 
improved pharmacovigilance for a growing cohort of older adult users. The data 
will be utilized by an interdisciplinary team developing new methods of 
identifying factors for individualized pharmacovigilance in older adults.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review to gather descriptive and quantitative data 
on tamoxifen pharmacovigilance.
SETTING: Multi-specialty clinic.
PATIENTS: Ninety-three patients 60 years of age and older.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Quantitative report of tamoxifen monitoring as well as 
descriptive analysis of individual cases.
RESULTS: We found 19 cases of serious adverse events possibly related to 
tamoxifen (thrombi, uterine malignancies). There were 15 cases with no 
documentation of pharmacovigilance. All cases had incomplete pharmacovigilance 
documented. There were two cases of hypercalcemia. There was one case of 
tamoxifen discontinuation resulting from muscle pain and with chronic muscle 
pain complaints while receiving tamoxifen. We observed a correlation in older 
age or high comorbidity burden patients and adverse events patients.
CONCLUSION: Some studies direct the important pharmacovigilance toward 
prevention of thrombi, uterine malignancies, and hypercalcemia; however, it is 
not easy to identify recommendations for frequency or focus of monitoring to 
prevent adverse events for individual older adults based on existing 
recommendations. The data collected and presented in this study serve to 
heighten awareness of tamoxifen pharmacovigilance and as a starting point for 
the application of machine learning techniques and modeling to identify 
high-risk patients and individualized pharmacovigilance recommendations.

DOI: 10.4140/TCP.n.2017.535
PMCID: PMC5812281
PMID: 28855012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Data Brief. 2021 Jan 17;35:106770. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2021.106770. eCollection 
2021 Apr.

Fidgety Philip and the Suggested Clinical Immobilization Test: Annotation data 
for developing a machine learning algorithm.

Chan M(1), Tse EK(1), Bao S(1), Berger M(1), Beyzaei N(1), Campbell M(1), Garn 
H(2), Hussaina H(1), Kloesch G(3), Kohn B(2), Kuzeljevic B(4), Lee YJ(5), Maher 
KS(1), Carson N(1), Jeyaratnam J(1), McWilliams S(1), Spruyt K(6), Van der Loos 
HFM(5), Kuo C(7), Ipsiroglu O(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)H-Behaviours Research Lab, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Austrian Institute of Technology, Austria.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Clinical Research Support Unit, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Science, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Institute National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Paris, 
France.
(7)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Education and Department of Computer 
Science, Faculty of Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The cartoon Fidgety Philip, the banner of Western-ADHD diagnosis, depicts a 
'restless' child exhibiting hyperactive-behaviors with hyper-arousability and/or 
hypermotor-restlessness (H-behaviors) during sitting. To overcome the gaps 
between differential diagnostic considerations and modern computing 
methodologies, we have developed a non-interpretative, neutral pictogram-guided 
phenotyping language (PG-PL) for describing body-segment movements during 
sitting (Journal of Psychiatric Research). To develop the PG-PL, seven research 
assistants annotated three original Fidgety Philip cartoons. Their annotations 
were analyzed with descriptive statistics. To review the PG-PL's performance, 
the same seven research assistants annotated 12 snapshots with free hand 
annotations, followed by using the PG-PL, each time in randomized sequence and 
on two separate occasions. After achieving satisfactory inter-observer 
agreements, the PG-PL annotation software was used for reviewing videos where 
the same seven research assistants annotated 12 one-minute long video clips. The 
video clip annotations were finally used to develop a machine learning algorithm 
for automated movement detection (Journal of Psychiatric Research). These data 
together demonstrate the value of the PG-PL for manually annotating human 
movement patterns. Researchers are able to reuse the data and the first version 
of the machine learning algorithm to further develop and refine the algorithm 
for differentiating movement patterns.

Crown Copyright © 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2021.106770
PMCID: PMC7851356
PMID: 33553523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships which have, or could be 
perceived to have, influenced the work reported in this article.


326. Eur J Hosp Pharm. 2022 Mar 24:ejhpharm-2021-003199. doi: 
10.1136/ejhpharm-2021-003199. Online ahead of print.

Analysis of adverse drug events as a way to improve cancer patient care.

Vicente-Oliveros N(1), Gramage-Caro T(2), Corral de la Fuente E(3), 
Delgado-Silveira E(2), Álvarez-Díaz AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacy, Ramon y Cajal University Hospital. IRYCIS, Madrid, Spain 
noelia.vicente@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Pharmacy, Ramon y Cajal University Hospital. IRYCIS, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Early Phase Clinical Drug Development in Oncology, South Texas Accelerated 
Research Therapeutics (START). Centro Integral Oncológico Clara Campal (CIOCC), 
Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: To define the signals that a new artificial intelligence (AI) system 
must emit to improve adverse drug events (ADEs) management in oral 
antineoplastic agents (OAA).
METHODS: A multidisciplinary group of experts in patient safety was set up to 
define what signals the new AI system must emit to improve ADEs management in 
OAAs. The baseline data for the new AI system were generated through an 
observational and ambispective study carried out in a university hospital. All 
patients who met the inclusion criteria were selected consecutively every 
working day for 6 months. The ADEs were collected by interview and by the review 
of health records. The ADEs were categorised according to how they could be 
detected: patient, analysis, examination.
RESULTS: The group defined what signals the AI system must emit to improve ADEs 
management in OAAs: a signal to educate the patient when the possible ADEs were 
categorised as patient, a signal as a reminder to request a blood test or a 
microbiological culture when the possible ADEs were categorised as analysis, and 
a signal as a reminder for the necessity of a clinical examination when the 
possible ADEs were categorised as examination. A total of 1652 ADEs were 
reported in the interviews (ADE-interview) with the pharmacist, and doctors 
noted 1989 ADEs in the health record (ADE-HR). The most frequent ADEs were 
identified in the patient category.
CONCLUSION: This study opens a new way for better management of ADEs and is the 
first step in the development of a future technology, which will improve the 
quality of life of patients.

© European Association of Hospital Pharmacists 2022. No commercial re-use. See 
rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ejhpharm-2021-003199
PMID: 35332064

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


327. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 9;14(4):e0215344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215344. 
eCollection 2019.

Correction: Machine learning model combining features from algorithms with 
different analytical methodologies to detect laboratory-event-related adverse 
drug reaction signals.

Jeong E, Park N, Choi Y, Park RW, Yoon D.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2018 Nov 21;13(11):e0207749.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207749.].

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215344
PMCID: PMC6456182
PMID: 30964930


328. Drug Saf. 2018 Jun;41(6):579-590. doi: 10.1007/s40264-018-0641-7.

Sorting Through the Safety Data Haystack: Using Machine Learning to Identify 
Individual Case Safety Reports in Social-Digital Media.

Comfort S(1), Perera S(2), Hudson Z(3), Dorrell D(3), Meireis S(3), Nagarajan 
M(2), Ramakrishnan C(2), Fine J(3).

Author information:
(1)Genentech, A Member of the Roche Group, Roche, South San Francisco, CA, USA. 
comforts@gene.com.
(2)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Genentech, A Member of the Roche Group, Roche, South San Francisco, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There is increasing interest in social digital media (SDM) as a 
data source for pharmacovigilance activities; however, SDM is considered a low 
information content data source for safety data. Given that pharmacovigilance 
itself operates in a high-noise, lower-validity environment without objective 
'gold standards' beyond process definitions, the introduction of large volumes 
of SDM into the pharmacovigilance workflow has the potential to exacerbate 
issues with limited manual resources to perform adverse event identification and 
processing. Recent advances in medical informatics have resulted in methods for 
developing programs which can assist human experts in the detection of valid 
individual case safety reports (ICSRs) within SDM.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we developed rule-based and machine learning (ML) 
models for classifying ICSRs from SDM and compared their performance with that 
of human pharmacovigilance experts.
METHODS: We used a random sampling from a collection of 311,189 SDM posts that 
mentioned Roche products and brands in combination with common medical and 
scientific terms sourced from Twitter, Tumblr, Facebook, and a spectrum of news 
media blogs to develop and evaluate three iterations of an automated ICSR 
classifier. The ICSR classifier models consisted of sub-components to annotate 
the relevant ICSR elements and a component to make the final decision on the 
validity of the ICSR. Agreement with human pharmacovigilance experts was chosen 
as the preferred performance metric and was evaluated by calculating the Gwet 
AC1 statistic (gKappa). The best performing model was tested against the Roche 
global pharmacovigilance expert using a blind dataset and put through a time 
test of the full 311,189-post dataset.
RESULTS: During this effort, the initial strict rule-based approach to ICSR 
classification resulted in a model with an accuracy of 65% and a gKappa of 46%. 
Adding an ML-based adverse event annotator improved the accuracy to 74% and 
gKappa to 60%. This was further improved by the addition of an additional ML 
ICSR detector. On a blind test set of 2500 posts, the final model demonstrated a 
gKappa of 78% and an accuracy of 83%. In the time test, it took the final model 
48 h to complete a task that would have taken an estimated 44,000 h for human 
experts to perform.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that an effective and scalable 
solution to the challenge of ICSR detection in SDM includes a workflow using an 
automated ML classifier to identify likely ICSRs for further human SME review.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-018-0641-7
PMCID: PMC5966485
PMID: 29446035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Shaun Comfort, Zoe Hudson, 
Darren Dorrell, Shawman Meireis, and Jennifer Fine were employed by Roche at the 
time this research was completed. Sujan Perera, Cartic Ramakrishnan, and Meena 
Nagarajan were employed by IBM at the time this research was completed. ETHICS 
STATEMENT: All human subject data used in this analysis were publicly available 
and used in a de-identified format whenever possible.


329. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2022 Aug;55:152038. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152038. Epub 2022 May 28.

Adalimumab or etanercept as first line biologic therapy in enthesitis related 
arthritis (ERA) - a drug-survival single centre study spanning 10 years.

Shipa MR(1), Heyer N(2), Mansoor R(3), Deakin CT(4), Madenidou AV(5), Bouraioui 
A(2), Fisher C(6), Leandro M(7), Ciurtin C(8), Sen D(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Rheumatology, Division of Medicine, University College London, 
London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK.
(2)University College London Hospital, Department of adolescent and young adult 
Rheumatology, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PG UK.
(3)Department of Population Health Sciences, King's College London Great Maze 
Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(4)Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, Division of Medicine, 
University College London, London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, 
Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, Division of Medicine, 
University College London, London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, 
Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK.
(6)University College London Hospital, Department of adolescent and young adult 
Rheumatology, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PG UK; Biomedical Research Centre 
UCLH UK.
(7)Centre for Rheumatology, Division of Medicine, University College London, 
London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK; 
University College London Hospital, Department of adolescent and young adult 
Rheumatology, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PG UK.
(8)University College London Hospital, Department of adolescent and young adult 
Rheumatology, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PG UK; Centre for Adolescent 
Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, Division of Medicine, University College London, 
London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK.
(9)University College London Hospital, Department of adolescent and young adult 
Rheumatology, 250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PG UK; Centre for Adolescent 
Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, Division of Medicine, University College London, 
London, UK. Rayne Institute, 5 University St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E 6JF UK; 
Biomedical Research Centre UCLH UK. Electronic address: d.sen@nhs.net.

OBJECTIVES: To analyse and compare drug-survival of adalimumab and etanercept 
(and their biosimilars) in biologic-naïve patients with ERA (Enthesitis-Related 
Arthritis).
METHODS: In this retrospective observational study, conventional statistics and 
machine-learning were applied to compare drug-survival (adalimumab, etanercept 
and their biosimilars initiated: 2009-2019) in ERA and identify determinants. 
The primary outcome was discontinuation of treatment due to primary- or 
secondary-failure and adverse drug-reactions.
RESULTS: During the observation period, 99 of 188 patients with ERA on 
first-line TNF inhibitors (etanercept-n=108, adalimumab-n=80) discontinued their 
treatment (median survival-time 3.9years, 95%CI 2.6-4.9years). Adalimumab was 
associated with longer drug-survival compared to etanercept especially after an 
initial positive response, with the median time to treatment discontinuation 
4.9years (95% CI 3.9-5.7) for adalimumab, compared to 2years (95%CI 1.4-4.0) for 
etanercept (HR of treatment-discontinuation-0.49, 95%CI 0.32--0.75, p=0.001). 
Adjusted by propensity-score, adalimumab-methotrexate combination was associated 
with longer drug survival, compared to adalimumab-monotherapy (HR-0.41, 95%CI 
0.20-0.85), etanercept-monotherapy (HR-0.28, 95%CI 0.15-0.53), and 
etanercept-methotrexate combination (HR-0.39, 95%CI 0.21-0.73). The presence of 
HLA-B27 was associated with longer drug-survival (HR-0.50, 95%CI 0.29-0.87) 
following an initial positive response. Higher-CRP at baseline was associated 
with higher rate of primary-failure (HR-1.68, 95%CI 1.08-2.62). Axial-ERA 
(sacroiliitis±spinal-involvement) was associated with poorer drug-survival for 
both primary- and secondary-failure (overall HR-2.03, 95%CI 1.22-3.40). Adjusted 
by propensity-score, shorter drug-survival was observed in patients with 
baseline-CRP≥12.15 mg/L, but only in the context of axial-ERA, not in 
peripheral-ERA (no sacroiliitis/spinal-involvement) (HR-2.28, 95%CI 1.13--3.64).
CONCLUSION: Following an initial positive primary response, continuing 
methotrexate with adalimumab was associated with the longest drug-survival 
compared to adalimumab-monotherapy or etanercept-based regimens. Axial-ERA was 
associated with a poorer drug-survival. A CRP >12.15 in patients with axial-ERA 
was associated with a higher rate of primary-failure. Further prospective 
studies are required to confirm these findings.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152038
PMID: 35660170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. JMIR Res Protoc. 2016 Jun 16;5(2):e121. doi: 10.2196/resprot.5621.

Using Social Media Data to Identify Potential Candidates for Drug Repurposing: A 
Feasibility Study.

Rastegar-Mojarad M(1), Liu H, Nambisan P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, United States. rastegar.83@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Drug repurposing (defined as discovering new indications for 
existing drugs) could play a significant role in drug development, especially 
considering the declining success rates of developing novel drugs. Typically, 
new indications for existing medications are identified by accident. However, 
new technologies and a large number of available resources enable the 
development of systematic approaches to identify and validate drug-repurposing 
candidates. Patients today report their experiences with medications on social 
media and reveal side effects as well as beneficial effects of those 
medications.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to assess the feasibility of using patient reviews from 
social media to identify potential candidates for drug repurposing.
METHODS: We retrieved patient reviews of 180 medications from an online forum, 
WebMD. Using dictionary-based and machine learning approaches, we identified 
disease names in the reviews. Several publicly available resources were used to 
exclude comments containing known indications and adverse drug effects. After 
manually reviewing some of the remaining comments, we implemented a rule-based 
system to identify beneficial effects.
RESULTS: The dictionary-based system and machine learning system identified 2178 
and 6171 disease names respectively in 64,616 patient comments. We provided a 
list of 10 common patterns that patients used to report any beneficial effects 
or uses of medication. After manually reviewing the comments tagged by our 
rule-based system, we identified five potential drug repurposing candidates.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first study to consider using social 
media data to identify drug-repurposing candidates. We found that even a 
rule-based system, with a limited number of rules, could identify beneficial 
effect mentions in patient comments. Our preliminary study shows that social 
media has the potential to be used in drug repurposing.

DOI: 10.2196/resprot.5621
PMCID: PMC4929348
PMID: 27311964

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


331. JMIR Med Inform. 2019 Sep 12;7(3):e14830. doi: 10.2196/14830.

Fine-Tuning Bidirectional Encoder Representations From Transformers (BERT)-Based 
Models on Large-Scale Electronic Health Record Notes: An Empirical Study.

Li F(1)(2)(3), Jin Y(1), Liu W(1)(2)(3), Rawat BPS(4), Cai P(4), Yu 
H(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
MA, United States.
(2)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Bedford 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, United States.
(4)School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: The bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT) 
model has achieved great success in many natural language processing (NLP) 
tasks, such as named entity recognition and question answering. However, little 
prior work has explored this model to be used for an important task in the 
biomedical and clinical domains, namely entity normalization.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to investigate the effectiveness of BERT-based models for 
biomedical or clinical entity normalization. In addition, our second objective 
is to investigate whether the domains of training data influence the 
performances of BERT-based models as well as the degree of influence.
METHODS: Our data was comprised of 1.5 million unlabeled electronic health 
record (EHR) notes. We first fine-tuned BioBERT on this large collection of 
unlabeled EHR notes. This generated our BERT-based model trained using 1.5 
million electronic health record notes (EhrBERT). We then further fine-tuned 
EhrBERT, BioBERT, and BERT on three annotated corpora for biomedical and 
clinical entity normalization: the Medication, Indication, and Adverse Drug 
Events (MADE) 1.0 corpus, the National Center for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI) disease corpus, and the Chemical-Disease Relations (CDR) corpus. We 
compared our models with two state-of-the-art normalization systems, namely 
MetaMap and disease name normalization (DNorm).
RESULTS: EhrBERT achieved 40.95% F1 in the MADE 1.0 corpus for mapping named 
entities to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities and the 
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT), which have 
about 380,000 terms. In this corpus, EhrBERT outperformed MetaMap by 2.36% in 
F1. For the NCBI disease corpus and CDR corpus, EhrBERT also outperformed DNorm 
by improving the F1 scores from 88.37% and 89.92% to 90.35% and 93.82%, 
respectively. Compared with BioBERT and BERT, EhrBERT outperformed them on the 
MADE 1.0 corpus and the CDR corpus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work shows that BERT-based models have achieved 
state-of-the-art performance for biomedical and clinical entity normalization. 
BERT-based models can be readily fine-tuned to normalize any kind of named 
entities.

©Fei Li, Yonghao Jin, Weisong Liu, Bhanu Pratap Singh Rawat, Pengshan Cai, Hong 
Yu. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 12.09.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/14830
PMCID: PMC6746103
PMID: 31516126

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


332. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 May 25;294:83-87. doi: 10.3233/SHTI220401.

Accelerating High-Dimensional Temporal Modelling Using Graphics Processing Units 
for Pharmacovigilance Signal Detection on Real-Life Data.

Sabatier P(1)(2), Feydy J(2), Jannot AS(1).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP.Centre, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM INRIA HeKA team, Cordeliers Research Center, Paris, France.

Adverse drug reaction is a major public health issue. The increasing 
availability of medico-administrative databases offers major opportunities to 
detect real-life pharmacovigilance signals. We have recently adapted a 
pharmacoepidemiological method to the large dimension, the WCE (Weigthed 
Cumulative Exposure) statistical model, which makes it possible to model the 
temporal relationship between the prescription of a drug and the appearance of a 
side effect without any a priori hypothesis. Unfortunately, this method faces a 
computational time problem. The objective of this paper is to describe the 
implementation of the WCE statistical model using Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) 
programming as a tool to obtain the spectrum of adverse drug reactions from 
medico-administrative databases. The process is divided into three steps: 
pre-processing of care pathways using the Python library Panda, calculation of 
temporal co-variables using the Python library "KeOps", estimation of the model 
parameters using the Python library "PyTorch" - standard in deep learning. 
Programming the WCE method by distributing the heaviest portions (notably spline 
calculation) on the GPU makes it possible to accelerate the time required for 
this method by 1000 times using a computer graphics card and up to 10,000 times 
with a GPU server. This implementation makes it possible to use WCE on all the 
drugs on the market to study their spectrum of adverse effects, to highlight new 
vigilance signals and thus to have a global vigilance tool on 
medico-administrative database. This is a proof of concept for the use of this 
technology in epidemiology.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI220401
PMID: 35612021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2022 Oct 31:15353702221128577. doi: 
10.1177/15353702221128577. Online ahead of print.

Increasing adverse drug events extraction robustness on social media: Case study 
on negation and speculation.

Scaboro S(1), Portelli B(1)(2), Chersoni E(3), Santus E(4), Serra G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Physics, University of Udine, 
Udine 33100, Italy.
(2)Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli 80138, Italy.
(3)Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hung Hom 999077, Hong Kong.
(4)Decision Science and Advanced Analytics for MAPV & RA, Bayer, Bayer 
Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, NJ 07981-1544, USA.

In the last decade, an increasing number of users have started reporting adverse 
drug events (ADEs) on social media platforms, blogs, and health forums. Given 
the large volume of reports, pharmacovigilance has focused on ways to use 
natural language processing (NLP) techniques to rapidly examine these large 
collections of text, detecting mentions of drug-related adverse reactions to 
trigger medical investigations. However, despite the growing interest in the 
task and the advances in NLP, the robustness of these models in face of 
linguistic phenomena such as negations and speculations is an open research 
question. Negations and speculations are pervasive phenomena in natural language 
and can severely hamper the ability of an automated system to discriminate 
between factual and non-factual statements in text. In this article, we take 
into consideration four state-of-the-art systems for ADE detection on social 
media texts. We introduce SNAX, a benchmark to test their performance against 
samples containing negated and speculated ADEs, showing their fragility against 
these phenomena. We then introduce two possible strategies to increase the 
robustness of these models, showing that both of them bring significant 
increases in performance, lowering the number of spurious entities predicted by 
the models by 60% for negation and 80% for speculations.

DOI: 10.1177/15353702221128577
PMID: 36314865


334. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2022 May 27;8(5):e32543. doi: 10.2196/32543.

Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Social Media Analysis for Pharmacovigilance of 
COVID-19 Vaccinations in the United Kingdom: Observational Study.

Hussain Z(#)(1)(2), Sheikh Z(#)(1), Tahir A(3), Dashtipour K(4), Gogate M(4), 
Sheikh A(5), Hussain A(4).

Author information:
(1)Edinburgh Medical School, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Engineering and 
Technology, Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Usher Institute, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The rollout of vaccines for COVID-19 in the United Kingdom started 
in December 2020. Uptake has been high, and there has been a subsequent 
reduction in infections, hospitalizations, and deaths among vaccinated 
individuals. However, vaccine hesitancy remains a concern, in particular 
relating to adverse effects following immunization (AEFIs). Social media 
analysis has the potential to inform policy makers about AEFIs being discussed 
by the public as well as public attitudes toward the national immunization 
campaign.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the frequency and nature of AEFI-related mentions 
on social media in the United Kingdom and to provide insights on public 
sentiments toward COVID-19 vaccines.
METHODS: We extracted and analyzed over 121,406 relevant Twitter and Facebook 
posts, from December 8, 2020, to April 30, 2021. These were thematically 
filtered using a 2-step approach, initially using COVID-19-related keywords and 
then using vaccine- and manufacturer-related keywords. We identified 
AEFI-related keywords and modeled their word frequency to monitor their trends 
over 2-week periods. We also adapted and utilized our recently developed hybrid 
ensemble model, which combines state-of-the-art lexicon rule-based and deep 
learning-based approaches, to analyze sentiment trends relating to the main 
vaccines available in the United Kingdom.
RESULTS: Our COVID-19 AEFI search strategy identified 46,762 unique Facebook 
posts by 14,346 users and 74,644 tweets (excluding retweets) by 36,446 users 
over the 4-month period. We identified an increasing trend in the number of 
mentions for each AEFI on social media over the study period. The most frequent 
AEFI mentions were found to be symptoms related to appetite (n=79,132, 14%), 
allergy (n=53,924, 9%), injection site (n=56,152, 10%), and clots (n=43,907, 
8%). We also found some rarely reported AEFIs such as Bell palsy (n=11,909, 2%) 
and Guillain-Barre syndrome (n=9576, 2%) being discussed as frequently as more 
well-known side effects like headache (n=10,641, 2%), fever (n=12,707, 2%), and 
diarrhea (n=16,559, 3%). Overall, we found public sentiment toward vaccines and 
their manufacturers to be largely positive (58%), with a near equal split 
between negative (22%) and neutral (19%) sentiments. The sentiment trend was 
relatively steady over time and had minor variations, likely based on political 
and regulatory announcements and debates.
CONCLUSIONS: The most frequently discussed COVID-19 AEFIs on social media were 
found to be broadly consistent with those reported in the literature and by 
government pharmacovigilance. We also detected potential safety signals from our 
analysis that have been detected elsewhere and are currently being investigated. 
As such, we believe our findings support the use of social media analysis to 
provide a complementary data source to conventional knowledge sources being used 
for pharmacovigilance purposes.

©Zain Hussain, Zakariya Sheikh, Ahsen Tahir, Kia Dashtipour, Mandar Gogate, Aziz 
Sheikh, Amir Hussain. Originally published in JMIR Public Health and 
Surveillance (https://publichealth.jmir.org), 27.05.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/32543
PMCID: PMC9150729
PMID: 35144240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: AS is a member of the 
chief medical officer’s COVID-19 Advisory Group of the Scottish Government and 
the Government of the United Kingdom’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus 
Threats Risk Stratification Subgroup. The views expressed are those of the 
authors and do not represent the views of the Scottish or UK Governments.


335. Pharmaceut Med. 2018;32(6):391-401. doi: 10.1007/s40290-018-0251-9. Epub 2018 
Oct 13.

Training Augmented Intelligent Capabilities for Pharmacovigilance: Applying 
Deep-learning Approaches to Individual Case Safety Report Processing.

Abatemarco D(1), Perera S(2), Bao SH(2), Desai S(1), Assuncao B(1), Tetarenko 
N(1), Danysz K(1), Mockute R(1), Widdowson M(1), Fornarotto N(1), Beauchamp 
S(1), Cicirello S(1), Mingle E(1).

Author information:
(1)1Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Avenue, Summit, NJ 07901 USA.
(2)IBM Watson Health, 75 Binney Street, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA.

INTRODUCTION: Regulations are increasing the scope of activities that fall under 
the remit of drug safety. Currently, individual case safety report (ICSR) 
collection and collation is done manually, requiring pharmacovigilance 
professionals to perform many transactional activities before data are available 
for assessment and aggregated analyses. For a biopharmaceutical company to meet 
its responsibilities to patients and regulatory bodies regarding the safe use 
and distribution of its products, improved business processes must be 
implemented to drive the industry forward in the best interest of patients 
globally. Augmented intelligent capabilities have already demonstrated success 
in capturing adverse events from diverse data sources. It has potential to 
provide a scalable solution for handling the ever-increasing ICSR volumes 
experienced within the industry by supporting pharmacovigilance professionals' 
decision-making.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to train and evaluate a consortium of 
cognitive services to identify key characteristics of spontaneous ICSRs 
satisfying an acceptable level of accuracy determined by considering business 
requirements and effective use in a real-world setting. The results of this 
study will serve as supporting evidence for or against implementing augmented 
intelligence in case processing to increase operational efficiency and data 
quality consistency.
METHODS: A consortium of ten cognitive services to augment aspects of ICSR 
processing were identified and trained through deep-learning approaches. The 
input data for model training were 20,000 ICSRs received by Celgene drug safety 
over a 2-year period. The data were manually made machine-readable through the 
process of transcription, which converts images into text. The machine-readable 
documents were manually annotated for pharmacovigilance data elements to 
facilitate the training and testing of the cognitive services. Once trained by 
cognitive developers, the cognitive services' output was reviewed by 
pharmacovigilance subject-matter experts against the accepted ground-truth for 
correctness and completeness. To be considered adequately trained and 
functional, each cognitive service was required to reach a threshold of F1 or 
accuracy score ≥ 75%.
RESULTS: All ten cognitive services under development have reached an evaluative 
score ≥ 75% for spontaneous ICSRs.
CONCLUSION: All cognitive services under development have achieved the minimum 
evaluative threshold to be considered adequately trained, demonstrating how 
machine-learning and natural language processing techniques together provide 
accurate outputs that may augment pharmacovigilance professionals' processing of 
spontaneous ICSRs quickly and accurately. The intention of augmented 
intelligence is not to replace the pharmacovigilance professional, but rather 
support them in their consistent decision-making so that they may better handle 
the overwhelming amount of data otherwise manually curated and monitored for 
ongoing drug surveillance requirements. Through this supported decision-making, 
pharmacovigilance professionals may have more time to apply their knowledge in 
assessing the case rather than spending it performing transactional tasks to 
simply capture the pertinent data within a safety database. By capturing data 
consistently and efficiently, we begin to build a corpus of data upon which 
analyses may be conducted and insights gleaned. Cognitive services may be key to 
an organization's transformation to more proactive decision-making needed to 
meet regulatory requirements and enhance patient safety.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-018-0251-9
PMCID: PMC6267537
PMID: 30546259

Conflict of interest statement: Danielle Abatemarco, Sameen Desai, Bruno 
Assuncao, Niki Tetarenko, Karolina Danysz, Ruta Mockute, Mark Widdowson, Nicole 
Fornarotto, Sheryl Beauchamp, Salvatore Cicirello, and Edward Mingle were 
employed by Celgene Corporation at the time this research was completed. Sujan 
Perera and Sheng Hua Bao were employed by IBM at the time this research was 
completed.All human subject data used in this research was stored and shared 
securely.


336. Int J Med Inform. 2021 Sep;153:104530. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2021.104530. Epub 
2021 Jul 16.

Differences in information accessed in a pharmacologic knowledge base using a 
conversational agent vs traditional search methods.

Preininger AM(1), Rosario BL(2), Buchold AM(1), Heiland J(1), Kutub N(1), 
Bohanan BS(1), South B(1), Jackson GP(3).

Author information:
(1)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address: brosario@ibm.com.
(3)IBM Watson Health, Cambridge, MA, USA; Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Clinicians rely on pharmacologic knowledge bases to answer 
medication questions and avoid potential adverse drug events. In late 2018, an 
artificial intelligence-based conversational agent, Watson Assistant (WA), was 
made available to online subscribers to the pharmacologic knowledge base, 
Micromedex®. WA allows users to ask medication-related questions in natural 
language. This study evaluated search method-dependent differences in the 
frequency of information accessed by traditional methods (keyword search and 
heading navigation) vs conversational agent search.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared the proportion of information types accessed 
through the conversational agent to the proportion of analogous information 
types accessed by traditional methods during the first 6 months of 2020.
RESULTS: Addition of the conversational agent allowed early adopters to access 
22 different information types contained in the 'quick answers' portion of the 
knowledge base. These information types were accessed 117,550 times with WA 
during the study period, compared to 33,649,651 times using traditional search 
methods. The distribution across information types differed by method employed 
(c2 test, P < .0001). Single drug/dosing, FDA/non-FDA uses, adverse effects, and 
drug administration emerged as 4 of the top 5 information types accessed by 
either method. Intravenous compatibility was accessed more frequently using the 
conversational agent (7.7% vs. 0.6% for traditional methods), whereas dose 
adjustments were accessed more frequently via traditional methods (4.8% vs. 1.4% 
for WA).
CONCLUSION: In a widely used pharmacologic knowledge base, information accessed 
through conversational agents versus traditional methods differed. User-centered 
studies are needed to understand these differences.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2021.104530
PMID: 34332466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Vnitr Lek. 2011 Nov;57(11):930-6.

[Insulin therapy in 2011].

[Article in Czech]

Perusiová J(1).

Author information:
(1)Interní klinika 2. lékarské fakulty UK a FN Motol Praha. 
jindra.perusicova@seznam.cz

Current medicine, including insulin therapy of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, 
emphasises "individualized" treatment approach. The basic requirements for such 
approach include: early initiation of insulin therapy, minimizing adverse drug 
reactions (hypoglycaemia, weight gain, poorer quality of life) and selection of 
the best insulin regimen. Therapy has to achieve long-term satisfactory diabetes 
control to prevent chronic vascular complications. Treatment should aim at 
reducing HbA(1c) levels as well as limiting postprandial glycaemia (fluctuations 
of glucose levels before and after food increase the risk of vascular 
complications). It has been confirmed that insulin therapy improves secretory 
function of beta-cells and insulin sensitivity. The requirement for early 
insulin initiation is based on the "metabolic memory" phenomenon; improved 
glycaemic compensation (even if it is followed by decompensation) has a positive 
effect on the risk of delayed complications. Novel agents and technologies are 
being developed: insulin inhalation and oral formulation, ultra-short and 
ultra-long insulin analogues as well as insulin-producing stem cells and 
artificial intelligence techniques.

PMID: 22165699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Med Internet Res. 2022 May 13;24(5):e35115. doi: 10.2196/35115.

Monitoring User Opinions and Side Effects on COVID-19 Vaccines in the 
Twittersphere: Infodemiology Study of Tweets.

Portelli B(1)(2), Scaboro S(1), Tonino R(1), Chersoni E(3), Santus E(4), Serra 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Physics, University of Udine, 
Udine, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
(4)Decision Science and Advanced Analytics for Medical Affairs and 
Pharmacovigilance, Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, NJ, United States.

BACKGROUND: In the current phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are witnessing the 
most massive vaccine rollout in human history. Like any other drug, vaccines may 
cause unexpected side effects, which need to be investigated in a timely manner 
to minimize harm in the population. If not properly dealt with, side effects may 
also impact public trust in the vaccination campaigns carried out by national 
governments.
OBJECTIVE: Monitoring social media for the early identification of side effects, 
and understanding the public opinion on the vaccines are of paramount importance 
to ensure a successful and harmless rollout. The objective of this study was to 
create a web portal to monitor the opinion of social media users on COVID-19 
vaccines, which can offer a tool for journalists, scientists, and users alike to 
visualize how the general public is reacting to the vaccination campaign.
METHODS: We developed a tool to analyze the public opinion on COVID-19 vaccines 
from Twitter, exploiting, among other techniques, a state-of-the-art system for 
the identification of adverse drug events on social media; natural language 
processing models for sentiment analysis; statistical tools; and open-source 
databases to visualize the trending hashtags, news articles, and their 
factuality. All modules of the system are displayed through an open web portal.
RESULTS: A set of 650,000 tweets was collected and analyzed in an ongoing 
process that was initiated in December 2020. The results of the analysis are 
made public on a web portal (updated daily), together with the processing tools 
and data. The data provide insights on public opinion about the vaccines and its 
change over time. For example, users show a high tendency to only share news 
from reliable sources when discussing COVID-19 vaccines (98% of the shared 
URLs). The general sentiment of Twitter users toward the vaccines is 
negative/neutral; however, the system is able to record fluctuations in the 
attitude toward specific vaccines in correspondence with specific events (eg, 
news about new outbreaks). The data also show how news coverage had a high 
impact on the set of discussed topics. To further investigate this point, we 
performed a more in-depth analysis of the data regarding the AstraZeneca 
vaccine. We observed how media coverage of blood clot-related side effects 
suddenly shifted the topic of public discussions regarding both the AstraZeneca 
and other vaccines. This became particularly evident when visualizing the most 
frequently discussed symptoms for the vaccines and comparing them month by 
month.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a tool connected with a web portal to monitor and 
display some key aspects of the public's reaction to COVID-19 vaccines. The 
system also provides an overview of the opinions of the Twittersphere through 
graphic representations, offering a tool for the extraction of suspected adverse 
events from tweets with a deep learning model.

©Beatrice Portelli, Simone Scaboro, Roberto Tonino, Emmanuele Chersoni, Enrico 
Santus, Giuseppe Serra. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (https://www.jmir.org), 13.05.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/35115
PMCID: PMC9132143
PMID: 35446781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: ES is a Senior Lead Data 
Scientist at Bayer Pharmaceuticals. The other authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.


339. Int J Med Inform. 2022 Apr;160:104708. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2022.104708. Epub 
2022 Feb 5.

Pharmaceutical algorithms set in a real time clinical decision support targeting 
high-alert medications applied to pharmaceutical analysis.

Potier A(1), Dufay E(2), Dony A(2), Divoux E(2), Arnoux LA(3), Boschetti E(3), 
Piney D(2), Dupont C(4), Berquand I(5), Calvo JC(6), Jay N(7), Demoré B(8).

Author information:
(1)Service de pharmacie, CH de Luneville, 54300 Luneville, France; Service de 
pharmacie, CHRU de Nancy, 54000 Nancy, France. Electronic address: 
a.potier@chru-nancy.fr.
(2)Service de pharmacie, CH de Luneville, 54300 Luneville, France.
(3)Service de pharmacie, CHRU de Nancy, 54000 Nancy, France.
(4)Délégation du Système d'Information, CH de Lunéville, 54300 Luneville, 
France.
(5)Service d'information médicale, CH de Lunéville, 54300 Luneville, France.
(6)Département territorial de la Transformation Numérique et de l'Ingénierie 
Biomédicale, CHRU de Nancy, F-54000 Nancy, France.
(7)Service d'information médicale, CHRU de Nancy, 54000 Nancy, France; 
Université de Lorraine, K Team - Data Science, Knowledge, Reasoning and 
Engineering, 54000 Nancy, France.
(8)Service de pharmacie, CHRU de Nancy, 54000 Nancy, France; Université de 
Lorraine, APEMAC, 54000 Nancy, France.

BACKGROUND: Pharmaceutical analysis of the prescription has to prop up the 
quality of patients' medication management in a context of medication's risk 
acculturation. But this activity remains highly variable. Medication-related 
clinical decision support may succeed in reducing adverse drug events and 
healthcare costs.
PURPOSE: This study aims to present AVICENNE as a real time medication-related 
clinical decision support (rt-CDS) applied to pharmaceutical analysis and its 
ability to detect Drug related problems (DRP) consecutively resolved by 
pharmacists. Basic procedures A Medication-related rt-CDS is created by 
integrating the software PharmaClass® (Keenturtle), 5 health data streams on the 
patient and Pharmaceutical algorithms (PA). PA are created by modeling the 
pharmaceutical experiment about DRP and the thread of their criticality. They 
are partially encoded as computerized rules in Pharmaclass® allowing alerts' 
issue. An observational prospective study is conducted during 9-months among 
1000 beds in 2 health facilities. The first step is to identify alerts as DRP; 
their resolution follows with clear guidelines worked out for the pharmaceutical 
analysis. A basis on predictive positive values (PPV) of the PA is being built 
today helping to know the performance of DRP detection and resolution. Main 
findings 71 PA are encoded as rules into Pharmaclass®: 40 targeted serious 
adverse drug events. 1508 alerts are analyzed by pharmacists. Among them 921 
DRPs were characterized and 540 pharmaceutical interventions transmitted of 
which 219 were accepted by prescribers. Three PPV are defined depending on 
software, pharmacist and patient. Principal conclusion Clinical pharmacy 
societies should host, share and update a national corpus of PA and exploit its 
educational interest.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2022.104708
PMID: 35168091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Med Inform. 2019 Dec;132:103971. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.103971. Epub 
2019 Oct 5.

A systematic review of natural language processing for classification tasks in 
the field of incident reporting and adverse event analysis.

Young IJB(1), Luz S(2), Lone N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Edinburgh Royal 
Infirmary, 51 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH16 4SA, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: Ianyoung3@nhs.net.
(2)Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences & Informatics, The University 
of Edinburgh, 9 Little France Rd, Edinburgh, Scotland EH16 4UX, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: S.Luz@ed.ac.uk.
(3)Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences and Informatics, The University 
of Edinburgh, Teviot Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9AG, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: Nazir.lone@ed.ac.uk.

CONTEXT: Adverse events in healthcare are often collated in incident reports 
which contain unstructured free text. Learning from these events may improve 
patient safety. Natural language processing (NLP) uses computational techniques 
to interrogate free text, reducing the human workload associated with its 
analysis. There is growing interest in applying NLP to patient safety, but the 
evidence in the field has not been summarised and evaluated to date.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a systematic literature review and narrative synthesis to 
describe and evaluate NLP methods for classification of incident reports and 
adverse events in healthcare.
METHODS: Data sources included Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, CINAHL, 
MIDIRS, ISI Web of Science, SciELO, Google Scholar, PROSPERO, hand searching of 
key articles, and OpenGrey. Data items were manually abstracted to a 
standardised extraction form.
RESULTS: From 428 articles screened for eligibility, 35 met the inclusion 
criteria of using NLP to perform a classification task on incident reports, or 
with the aim of detecting adverse events. The majority of studies used free text 
from incident reporting systems or electronic health records. Models were 
typically designed to classify by type of incident, type of medication error, or 
harm severity. A broad range of NLP techniques are demonstrated to perform these 
classification tasks with favourable performance outcomes. There are 
methodological challenges in how these results can be interpreted in a broader 
context.
CONCLUSION: NLP can generate meaningful information from unstructured data in 
the specific domain of the classification of incident reports and adverse 
events. Understanding what or why incidents are occurring is important in 
adverse event analysis. If NLP enables these insights to be drawn from larger 
datasets it may improve the learning from adverse events in healthcare.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.103971
PMID: 31630063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2018 Apr 25;4(2):e29. doi: 
10.2196/publichealth.9361.

Clinical Relation Extraction Toward Drug Safety Surveillance Using Electronic 
Health Record Narratives: Classical Learning Versus Deep Learning.

Munkhdalai T(1), Liu F(1), Yu H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
MA, United States.
(3)The Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Medication and adverse drug event (ADE) information extracted from 
electronic health record (EHR) notes can be a rich resource for drug safety 
surveillance. Existing observational studies have mainly relied on structured 
EHR data to obtain ADE information; however, ADEs are often buried in the EHR 
narratives and not recorded in structured data.
OBJECTIVE: To unlock ADE-related information from EHR narratives, there is a 
need to extract relevant entities and identify relations among them. In this 
study, we focus on relation identification. This study aimed to evaluate natural 
language processing and machine learning approaches using the expert-annotated 
medical entities and relations in the context of drug safety surveillance, and 
investigate how different learning approaches perform under different 
configurations.
METHODS: We have manually annotated 791 EHR notes with 9 named entities (eg, 
medication, indication, severity, and ADEs) and 7 different types of relations 
(eg, medication-dosage, medication-ADE, and severity-ADE). Then, we explored 3 
supervised machine learning systems for relation identification: (1) a support 
vector machines (SVM) system, (2) an end-to-end deep neural network system, and 
(3) a supervised descriptive rule induction baseline system. For the neural 
network system, we exploited the state-of-the-art recurrent neural network (RNN) 
and attention models. We report the performance by macro-averaged precision, 
recall, and F1-score across the relation types.
RESULTS: Our results show that the SVM model achieved the best average F1-score 
of 89.1% on test data, outperforming the long short-term memory (LSTM) model 
with attention (F1-score of 65.72%) as well as the rule induction baseline 
system (F1-score of 7.47%) by a large margin. The bidirectional LSTM model with 
attention achieved the best performance among different RNN models. With the 
inclusion of additional features in the LSTM model, its performance can be 
boosted to an average F1-score of 77.35%.
CONCLUSIONS: It shows that classical learning models (SVM) remains advantageous 
over deep learning models (RNN variants) for clinical relation identification, 
especially for long-distance intersentential relations. However, RNNs 
demonstrate a great potential of significant improvement if more training data 
become available. Our work is an important step toward mining EHRs to improve 
the efficacy of drug safety surveillance. Most importantly, the annotated data 
used in this study will be made publicly available, which will further promote 
drug safety research in the community.

©Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Feifan Liu, Hong Yu. Originally published in JMIR Public 
Health and Surveillance (http://publichealth.jmir.org), 25.04.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/publichealth.9361
PMCID: PMC5943628
PMID: 29695376

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


342. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2017 Jul 26;2017:185-192. eCollection 2017.

A comparative study of different methods for automatic identification of 
clopidogrel-induced bleedings in electronic health records.

Lee HJ(1), Jiang M(1), Wu Y(1), Shaffer CM(2), Cleator JH(2)(3), Friedman EA(4), 
Lewis JP(5), Roden DM(2)(3), Denny J(3)(6), Xu H(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN.
(3)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
TN.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(6)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN.

Electronic health records (EHRs) linked with biobanks have been recognized as 
valuable data sources for pharmacogenomic studies, which require identification 
of patients with certain adverse drug reactions (ADRs) from a large population. 
Since manual chart review is costly and time-consuming, automatic methods to 
accurately identify patients with ADRs have been called for. In this study, we 
developed and compared different informatics approaches to identify ADRs from 
EHRs, using clopidogrel-induced bleeding as our case study. Three different 
types of methods were investigated: 1) rule-based methods; 2) machine 
learning-based methods; and 3) scoring function-based methods. Our results show 
that both machine learning and scoring methods are effective and the scoring 
method can achieve a high precision with a reasonable recall. We also analyzed 
the contributions of different types of features and found that the temporality 
information between clopidogrel and bleeding events, as well as textual evidence 
from physicians' assertion of the adverse events are helpful. We believe that 
our findings are valuable in advancing EHR-based pharmacogenomic studies.

PMCID: PMC5543340
PMID: 28815128


343. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2019 Aug 21;264:452-456. doi: 10.3233/SHTI190262.

A Proficient Spelling Analysis Method Applied to a Pharmacovigilance Task.

Workman TE(1), Divita G(2), Shao Y(1), Zeng-Treitler Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Center, George Washington University, and Washington 
DC VA Medical Center, Washington, D.C.
(2)University of Utah School of Medicine, Division of Epidemiology, and VA 
Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT.

Misspellings in clinical free text present potential challenges to 
pharmacovigilance tasks, such as monitoring for potential ineffective treatment 
of drug-resistant infections. We developed a novel method using Word2Vec, 
Levenshtein edit distance constraints, and a customized lexicon to identify 
correct and misspelled pharmaceutical word forms. We processed a large corpus of 
clinical notes in a real-world pharmacovigilance task, achieving positive 
predictive values of 0.929 and 0.909 in identifying valid misspellings and 
correct spellings, respectively, and negative predictive values of 0.994 and 
0.333 as assessments where the program did not produce output. In a specific 
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus use case, the method identified 
9,815 additional instances in the corpus for potential inaffective drug 
administration inspection. The findings suggest that this method could 
potentially achieve satisfactory results for other pharmacovigilance tasks.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI190262
PMID: 31437964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Sci Rep. 2022 Jun 20;12(1):10317. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-13894-8.

Automated gathering of real-world data from online patient forums can complement 
pharmacovigilance for rare cancers.

Dirkson A(1), Verberne S(2), Kraaij W(1), van Oortmerssen G(1)(3), Gelderblom 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)LIACS, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)LIACS, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
s.verberne@liacs.leidenuniv.nl.
(3)Patient Platform Sarcomas, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Current methods of pharmacovigilance result in severe under-reporting of adverse 
drug events (ADEs). Patient forums have the potential to complement current 
pharmacovigilance practices by providing real-time uncensored and unsolicited 
information. We are the first to explore the value of patient forums for rare 
cancers. To this end, we conduct a case study on a patient forum for 
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor patients. We have developed machine learning 
algorithms to automatically extract and aggregate side effects from messages on 
open online discussion forums. We show that patient forum data can provide 
suggestions for which ADEs impact quality of life the most: For many side 
effects the relative reporting rate differs decidedly from that of the 
registration trials, including for example cognitive impairment and alopecia as 
side effects of avapritinib. We also show that our methods can provide 
real-world data for long-term ADEs, such as osteoporosis and tremors for 
imatinib, and novel ADEs not found in registration trials, such as dry eyes and 
muscle cramping for imatinib. We thus posit that automated pharmacovigilance 
from patient forums can provide real-world data for ADEs and should be employed 
as input for medical hypotheses for rare cancers.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-13894-8
PMCID: PMC9209513
PMID: 35725736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


345. J Biomed Inform. 2012 Apr;45(2):231-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.10.012. Epub 2011 
Nov 10.

Summary of Product Characteristics content extraction for a safe drugs usage.

Rubrichi S(1), Quaglini S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Biomedical Informatics, "Mario Stefanelli", Department of 
Computers and Systems Science, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
stefania.rubrichi@unipv.it

The use of medications has a central role in health care provision, yet on 
occasion, it may injure the person taking them as result of adverse drug events. 
A correct drug choice must be modulated to acknowledge both patients' status and 
drug-specific information. However, this information is locked in free-text and, 
as such, cannot be actively accessed and elaborated by computerized 
applications. The goal of this work lies in extracting content (active 
ingredient, interaction effects, etc.) from the Summary of Product 
Characteristics, focusing mainly on drug-related interactions, following a 
machine learning based approach. We compare two state of the art classifiers: 
conditional random fields with support vector machines. To this end, we 
introduce a corpus of 100 interaction sections, hand annotated with 13 labels 
that have been derived from a previously developed conceptual model. The results 
of our empirical analysis demonstrate that the two models perform well. They 
exhibit similar overall performance, with an overall accuracy of about 91%.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.10.012
PMID: 22094356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2022;142(4):319-326. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.21-00178-1.

[Medical Big Data Analysis Using Machine Learning Algorithms in the Field of 
Clinical Pharmacy].

[Article in Japanese]

Kiryu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, M&B Collaboration Medical corporation Hokuetsu 
Hospital.

Industrial reforms utilizing artificial intelligence (AI) have been progressing 
remarkably around the world in recent years. In medical informatics, the 
application of medical big data analytics using AI is also being promoted, and 
it is expected to provide screening methods for predicting potential adverse 
drug reactions (ADRs) and discovering new effects. Previously, we developed a 
unique ADRs analysis system that incorporates Accord.NET, an open-source machine 
learning (ML) framework written in the programming language C#, and uses the 
Japanese Adverse Drug Event Report (JADER) database. By using this system to 
analyze ADRs and screening the cause and severity of ADRs, information can be 
obtained to evaluate efficacy as well as ADRs. Although both statistical methods 
and ML are commonly used for prediction, a characteristic difference between 
them is that the former emphasizes causal relationships and the latter 
emphasizes prediction results. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between 
cases where decisions must be made with an emphasis on causality and those where 
decisions must be made by focusing on unknown risks, and statistical methods and 
ML should be selected and used as appropriate. Against this backdrop, this paper 
describes a use case and suggests that the proper use of AI tools to analyze 
medical big data will help clinical pharmacists practice optimal drug management 
for each patient.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.21-00178-1
PMID: 35370185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 27;12(4):e0176284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176284. 
eCollection 2017.

A computational toxicogenomics approach identifies a list of highly hepatotoxic 
compounds from a large microarray database.

Rueda-Zárate HA(1), Imaz-Rosshandler I(2), Cárdenas-Ovando RA(1), 
Castillo-Fernández JE(2), Noguez-Monroy J(1), Rangel-Escareño C(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnológico de Monterrey Mexico City, 
Mexico City, México.
(2)Computational Genomics Lab., Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico 
City, México.

The liver and the kidney are the most common targets of chemical toxicity, due 
to their major metabolic and excretory functions. However, since the liver is 
directly involved in biotransformation, compounds in many currently and normally 
used drugs could affect it adversely. Most chemical compounds are already 
labeled according to FDA-approved labels using DILI-concern scale. Drug Induced 
Liver Injury (DILI) scale refers to an adverse drug reaction. Many compounds do 
not exhibit hepatotoxicity at early stages of development, so it is important to 
detect anomalies at gene expression level that could predict adverse reactions 
in later stages. In this study, a large collection of microarray data is used to 
investigate gene expression changes associated with hepatotoxicity. Using 
TG-GATEs a large-scale toxicogenomics database, we present a computational 
strategy to classify compounds by toxicity levels in human and animal models 
through patterns of gene expression. We combined machine learning algorithms 
with time series analysis to identify genes capable of classifying compounds by 
FDA-approved labeling as DILI-concern toxic. The goal is to define gene 
expression profiles capable of distinguishing the different subtypes of 
hepatotoxicity. The study illustrates that expression profiling can be used to 
classify compounds according to different hepatotoxic levels; to label those 
that are currently labeled as undertemined; and to determine if at the molecular 
level, animal models are a good proxy to predict hepatotoxicity in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176284
PMCID: PMC5407788
PMID: 28448553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


348. Sci Rep. 2022 Sep 1;12(1):14869. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-18522-z.

Detecting early safety signals of infliximab using machine learning algorithms 
in the Korea adverse event reporting system.

Lee JE(#)(1), Kim JH(#)(1), Bae JH(1), Song I(2), Shin JY(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, 
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, 16419, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Health Administration, College of Nursing and Health, Kongju 
National University, Gongju, Republic of Korea.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, 
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, 16419, Republic of Korea. shin.jy@skku.edu.
(4)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences & Technology, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. shin.jy@skku.edu.
(5)Department of Biohealth Regulatory Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. shin.jy@skku.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

There has been a growing attention on using machine learning (ML) in 
pharmacovigilance. This study aimed to investigate the utility of supervised ML 
algorithms on timely detection of safety signals in the Korea Adverse Event 
Reporting System (KAERS), using infliximab as a case drug, between 2009 and 
2018. Input data set for ML training was constructed based on the drug label 
information and spontaneous reports in the KAERS. Gold standard dataset 
containing known AEs was randomly divided into the training and test sets. Two 
supervised ML algorithms (gradient boosting machine [GBM], random forest [RF]) 
were fitted with hyperparameters tuned on the training set by using a fivefold 
validation. Then, we stratified the KAERS data by calendar year to create 10 
cumulative yearly datasets, in which ML algorithms were applied to detect five 
pre-specified AEs of infliximab identified during post-marketing surveillance. 
Four AEs were detected by both GBM and RF in the first year they appeared in the 
KAERS and earlier than they were updated in the drug label of infliximab. We 
further applied our models to data retrieved from the US Food and Drug 
Administration Adverse Event Reporting System repository and found that they 
outperformed existing disproportionality methods. Both GBM and RF demonstrated 
reliable performance in detecting early safety signals and showed promise for 
applying such approaches to pharmacovigilance.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-18522-z
PMCID: PMC9436954
PMID: 36050484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


349. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2022 Feb;56:102066. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2021.102066. Epub 2021 
Nov 20.

Development of a prediction models for chemotherapy-induced adverse drug 
reactions: A retrospective observational study using electronic health records.

On J(1), Park HA(2), Yoo S(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, Seoul National University, 103, Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jjwa55@snu.ac.kr.
(2)College of Nursing, Seoul National University, 103, Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program of Medical 
Informatics, Seoul National University, 103, Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: hapark@snu.ac.kr.
(3)Healthcare ICT Research Center, Office of eHealth Research and Businesses, 
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 82 Gumi-ro, 173 Beon-gil, Gumi-ro, 
Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
yoosoo0@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Chemotherapy-induced adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are common and 
diverse, and not only affect changes or interruptions to treatment schedules, 
but also negatively affect the patient's quality of life. This study aimed to 
predict eight chemotherapy-induced ADRs based on electronic health records (EHR) 
data using machine-learning algorithms.
METHODS: We used EHR data of 6812 chemotherapy cycles for 935 adult patients 
receiving four different chemotherapy regimens (FOLFOX, 
5-fluorouracil + oxaliplatin + leucovorin; FOLFIRI, 
5-fluorouracil + irinotecan + leucovorin; paclitaxel; and GP, 
gemcitabine + cisplatin) at a tertiary teaching hospital between January 2015 
and June 2016. The predicted ADRs included nausea-vomiting, fatigue-anorexia, 
diarrhea, peripheral neuropathy, hypersensitivity, stomatitis, hand-foot 
syndrome, and constipation. Three machine learning algorithms were used to 
developed prediction models: logistic regression, decision tree, and artificial 
neural network. We compared the performance of the models with area of under the 
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve (AUC) and accuracy.
RESULTS: The AUCs of the logistic regression, decision tree, and artificial 
neural network models were 0.62-0.83, 0.61-0.83, and 0.62-0.83, respectively, 
and the accuracies were 0.59-0.84, 0.55-0.88, and 0.57-0.88, respectively. Among 
the algorithms, the logistic regression models performed best and had the 
highest AUC for six ADRs (range 0.67-0.83). The nausea-vomiting prediction 
models performed best with an AUC of 0.83 for the three algorithms.
CONCLUSIONS: The prediction models for chemotherapy-induced ADRs were able to 
predict eight ADRs using EHR data. The logistic regression models were best 
suited to predict ADRs. The models developed in this study can be used to 
predict the risk of ADRs in patients receiving chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2021.102066
PMID: 34861529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 Jan 14;289:61-64. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210859.

ABiMed: Towards an Innovative Clinical Decision Support System for Medication 
Reviews and Polypharmacy Management.

Mouazer A(1), Leguillon R(1), Leroy B(2), Sedki K(1), Simon C(3), Falcoff H(4), 
Schuers M(2)(1), Dubois S(5), Bousquet C(1), Soualmia L(6)(1), Letord C(1), 
Darmoni S(1)(7), Bouaud J(1), Séroussi B(1), Tsopra R(8)(9), Lamy JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Informatique Médicale et d'Ingénierie des Connaissances en 
e-Santé - LIMICS, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Sorbonne Université, INSERM 
UMR 1142, F-93000, Bobigny, France.
(2)Département de Médecine Générale, Université de Rouen, France.
(3)EIG Santé, 49070 Beaucouzé, France.
(4)Société de Formation Thérapeutique du Généraliste (SFTG), Paris, France.
(5)CPTS Paris 13, 75013 Paris, France.
(6)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, LITIS EA 4108, F-76000 Rouen, France.
(7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Rouen University Hospital, France.
(8)INSERM, Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Centre de Recherche des 
Cordeliers, Information Sciences to support Personalized Medicine, F-75006 
Paris, France.
(9)Department of Medical Informatics, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, 
Paris, France.

Polypharmacy in elderly is a public health problem with both clinical (increase 
of adverse drug events) and economic issues. One solution is medication review, 
a structured assessment of patients' drug orders by the pharmacist for 
optimizing the therapy. However, this task is tedious, cognitively complex and 
error-prone, and only a few clinical decision support systems have been proposed 
for supporting it. Existing systems are either rule-based systems implementing 
guidelines, or documentary systems presenting drug knowledge. In this paper, we 
present the ABiMed research project, and, through literature reviews and 
brainstorming, we identified five candidate innovations for a decision support 
system for medication review: patient data transfer from GP to pharmacists, use 
of semantic technologies, association of rule-based and documentary approaches, 
use of machine learning, and a two-way discussion between pharmacist and GP 
after the medication review.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210859
PMID: 35062092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Sep 18;9:1010. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01010. eCollection 
2018.

Propensity Score-Based Approaches in High Dimension for Pharmacovigilance Signal 
Detection: an Empirical Comparison on the French Spontaneous Reporting Database.

Courtois É(1), Pariente A(2), Salvo F(2), Volatier É(1), Tubert-Bitter P(1), 
Ahmed I(1).

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics, Biomathematics, Pharmacoepidemiology and Infectious Diseases, 
INSERM, UVSQ (Université Paris-Saclay), Institut Pasteur, Villejuif, France.
(2)Bordeaux Population Health Research Center, Pharmacoepidemiology Team (UMR 
1219), INSERM, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Classical methods used for signal detection in pharmacovigilance rely on 
disproportionality analysis of counts aggregating spontaneous reports of a given 
adverse drug reaction. In recent years, alternative methods have been proposed 
to analyze individual spontaneous reports such as penalized multiple logistic 
regression approaches. These approaches address some well-known biases resulting 
from disproportionality methods. However, while penalization accounts for 
computational constraints due to high-dimensional data, it raises the issue of 
determining the regularization parameter and eventually that of an 
error-controlling decision rule. We present a new automated signal detection 
strategy for pharmacovigilance systems, based on propensity scores (PS) in high 
dimension. PSs are increasingly used to assess a given association with 
high-dimensional observational healthcare databases in accounting for confusion 
bias. Our main aim was to develop a method having the same advantages as 
multiple regression approaches in dealing with bias, while relying on the 
statistical multiple comparison framework as regards decision thresholds, by 
considering false discovery rate (FDR)-based decision rules. We investigate four 
PS estimation methods in high dimension: a gradient tree boosting (GTB) 
algorithm from machine-learning and three variable selection algorithms. For 
each (drug, adverse event) pair, the PS is then applied as adjustment covariate 
or by using two kinds of weighting: inverse proportional treatment weighting and 
matching weights. The different versions of the new approach were compared to a 
univariate approach, which is a disproportionality method, and to two penalized 
multiple logistic regression approaches, directly applied on spontaneous 
reporting data. Performance was assessed through an empirical comparative study 
conducted on a reference signal set in the French national pharmacovigilance 
database (2000-2016) that was recently proposed for drug-induced liver injury. 
Multiple regression approaches performed better in detecting true positives and 
false positives. Nonetheless, the performances of the PS-based methods using 
matching weights was very similar to that of multiple regression and better than 
with the univariate approach. In addition to being able to control FDR 
statistical errors, the proposed PS-based strategy is an interesting alternative 
to multiple regression approaches.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01010
PMCID: PMC6153352
PMID: 30279658


352. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Aug;56:318-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.016. Epub 2015 
Jun 30.

On the creation of a clinical gold standard corpus in Spanish: Mining adverse 
drug reactions.

Oronoz M(1), Gojenola K(1), Pérez A(1), de Ilarraza AD(1), Casillas A(2).

Author information:
(1)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), Computer Engineering 
Faculty, P. Manuel Lardizabal, 1, 20018 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain(1).
(2)IXA Group, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), Computer Engineering 
Faculty, P. Manuel Lardizabal, 1, 20018 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain(1). 
Electronic address: arantza.casillas@ehu.eus.

The advances achieved in Natural Language Processing make it possible to 
automatically mine information from electronically created documents. Many 
Natural Language Processing methods that extract information from texts make use 
of annotated corpora, but these are scarce in the clinical domain due to legal 
and ethical issues. In this paper we present the creation of the IxaMed-GS gold 
standard composed of real electronic health records written in Spanish and 
manually annotated by experts in pharmacology and pharmacovigilance. The experts 
mainly annotated entities related to diseases and drugs, but also relationships 
between entities indicating adverse drug reaction events. To help the experts in 
the annotation task, we adapted a general corpus linguistic analyzer to the 
medical domain. The quality of the annotation process in the IxaMed-GS corpus 
has been assessed by measuring the inter-annotator agreement, which was 90.53% 
for entities and 82.86% for events. In addition, the corpus has been used for 
the automatic extraction of adverse drug reaction events using machine learning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.016
PMID: 26141794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):419-427. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01169-0. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Black Swan Events and Intelligent Automation for Routine Safety Surveillance.

Kjoersvik O(1), Bate A(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)R&D IT, MSD, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Global Safety, GSK, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, TW8 9GS, Middlesex, UK. 
andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(3)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, London, UK. andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.
(4)Department of Medicine at NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, USA. 
andrew.x.bate@gsk.com.

Effective identification of previously implausible safety signals is a core 
component of successful pharmacovigilance. Timely, reliable, and efficient data 
ingestion and related processing are critical to this. The term 'black swan 
events' was coined by Taleb to describe events with three attributes: 
unpredictability, severe and widespread consequences, and retrospective bias. 
These rare events are not well understood at their emergence but are often 
rationalized in retrospect as predictable. Pharmacovigilance strives to rapidly 
respond to potential black swan events associated with medicine or vaccine use. 
Machine learning (ML) is increasingly being explored in data ingestion tasks. In 
contrast to rule-based automation approaches, ML can use historical data (i.e., 
'training data') to effectively predict emerging data patterns and support 
effective data intake, processing, and organisation. At first sight, this 
reliance on previous data might be considered a limitation when building ML 
models for effective data ingestion in systems that look to focus on the 
identification of potential black swan events. We argue that, first, some 
apparent black swan events-although unexpected medically-will exhibit data 
attributes similar to those of other safety data and not prove algorithmically 
unpredictable, and, second, standard and emerging ML approaches can still be 
robust to such data outliers with proper awareness and consideration in ML 
system design and with the incorporation of specific mitigatory and support 
strategies. We argue that effective approaches to managing data on potential 
black swan events are essential for trust and outline several strategies to 
address data on potential black swan events during data ingestion.

© 2022. TransCelerate BioPharma, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01169-0
PMCID: PMC9112242
PMID: 35579807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Oeystein Kjoersvik is an employee of MSD. Andrew 
Bate is an employee and stockholder of GSK.


354. J Biomed Inform. 2018 Oct;86:135-142. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.09.007. Epub 2018 
Sep 10.

Identifying health information technology related safety event reports from 
patient safety event report databases.

Fong A(1), Adams KT(2), Gaunt MJ(3), Howe JL(2), Kellogg KM(4), Ratwani RM(4).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare, MedStar Health, 3007 Tilden 
St. NW, Suite 7L, Washington, D.C. 20008, USA. Electronic address: 
allan.fong@medstar.net.
(2)National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare, MedStar Health, 3007 Tilden 
St. NW, Suite 7L, Washington, D.C. 20008, USA.
(3)Institute for Safe Medication Practices, 200 Lakeside Dr, Suite 200, Horsham, 
PA 19044, USA.
(4)National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare, MedStar Health, 3007 Tilden 
St. NW, Suite 7L, Washington, D.C. 20008, USA; Georgetown University School of 
Medicine, 3800 Reservoir Rd NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this paper was to identify health information 
technology (HIT) related events from patient safety event (PSE) report free-text 
descriptions. A difference-based scoring approach was used to prioritize and 
select model features. A feature-constraint model was developed and evaluated to 
support the analysis of PSE reports.
METHODS: 5287 PSE reports manually coded as likely or unlikely related to HIT 
were used to train unigram, bigram, and combined unigram-bigram logistic 
regression and support vector machine models using five-fold cross validation. A 
difference-based scoring approach was used to prioritize and select unigram and 
bigram features by their relative importance to likely and unlikely HIT reports. 
A held-out set of 2000 manually coded reports were used for testing.
RESULTS: Unigram models tended to perform better than bigram and combined 
models. A 300-unigram logistic regression had comparable classification 
performance to a 4030-unigram SVM model but with a faster relative run-time. The 
300-unigram logistic regression model evaluated with the testing data had an AUC 
of 0.931 and a F1-score of 0.765.
DISCUSSION: A difference-based scoring, prioritization, and feature selection 
approach can be used to generate simplified models with high performance. A 
feature-constraint model may be more easily shared across healthcare 
organizations seeking to analyze their respective datasets and customized for 
local variations in PSE reporting practices.
CONCLUSION: The feature-constraint model provides a method to identify 
HIT-related patient safety hazards using a method that is applicable across 
healthcare systems with variability in their PSE report structures.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.09.007
PMID: 30213556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. medRxiv. 2022 Mar 21:2021.02.09.21251454. doi: 10.1101/2021.02.09.21251454. 
Preprint.

SEED: Symptom Extraction from English Social Media Posts using Deep Learning and 
Transfer Learning.

Magge A, Weissenbacher D, Oâ Connor K, Scotch M, Gonzalez-Hernandez G.

The increase of social media usage across the globe has fueled efforts in 
digital epidemiology for mining valuable information such as medication use, 
adverse drug effects and reports of viral infections that directly and 
indirectly affect population health. Such specific information can, however, be 
scarce, hard to find, and mostly expressed in very colloquial language. In this 
work, we focus on a fundamental problem that enables social media mining for 
disease monitoring. We present and make available SEED, a natural language 
processing approach to detect symptom and disease mentions from social media 
data obtained from platforms such as Twitter and DailyStrength and to normalize 
them into UMLS terminology. Using multi-corpus training and deep learning 
models, the tool achieves an overall F1 score of 0.86 and 0.72 on DailyStrength 
and balanced Twitter datasets, significantly improving over previous approaches 
on the same datasets. We apply the tool on Twitter posts that report COVID19 
symptoms, particularly to quantify whether the SEED system can extract symptoms 
absent in the training data. The study results also draw attention to the 
potential of multi-corpus training for performance improvements and the need for 
continuous training on newly obtained data for consistent performance amidst the 
ever-changing nature of the social media vocabulary.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.02.09.21251454
PMCID: PMC7885933
PMID: 33594374


356. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2018 
Sep;61(9):1075-1081. doi: 10.1007/s00103-018-2786-z.

[Detection of drug risks after approval : Methods development for the use of 
routine statutory health insurance data].

[Article in German]

Foraita R(1), Dijkstra L(2), Falkenberg F(3), Garling M(3), Linder R(3), Pflock 
R(4), Rizkallah MR(2), Schwaninger M(4), Wright MN(2), Pigeot I(2).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz-Institut für Präventionsforschung und Epidemiologie - BIPS, 
Achterstr. 30, 28359, Bremen, Deutschland. foraita@leibniz-bips.de.
(2)Leibniz-Institut für Präventionsforschung und Epidemiologie - BIPS, 
Achterstr. 30, 28359, Bremen, Deutschland.
(3)Wissenschaftliches Institut der Techniker Krankenkasse für Nutzen und 
Effizienz im Gesundheitswesen (WINEG TK), Hamburg, Deutschland.
(4)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Deutschland.

Adverse drug reactions are among the leading causes of death. Pharmacovigilance 
aims to monitor drugs after they have been released to the market in order to 
detect potential risks. Data sources commonly used to this end are spontaneous 
reports sent in by doctors or pharmaceutical companies. Reports alone are rather 
limited when it comes to detecting potential health risks. Routine statutory 
health insurance data, however, are a richer source since they not only provide 
a detailed picture of the patients' wellbeing over time, but also contain 
information on concomitant medication and comorbidities.To take advantage of 
their potential and to increase drug safety, we will further develop statistical 
methods that have shown their merit in other fields as a source of inspiration. 
A plethora of methods have been proposed over the years for spontaneous 
reporting data: a comprehensive comparison of these methods and their potential 
use for longitudinal data should be explored. In addition, we show how methods 
from machine learning could aid in identifying rare risks. We discuss these 
so-called enrichment analyses and how utilizing pharmaceutical similarities 
between drugs and similarities between comorbidities could help to construct 
risk profiles of the patients prone to experience an adverse drug 
event.Summarizing these methods will further push drug safety research based on 
healthcare claim data from German health insurances which form, due to their 
size, longitudinal coverage, and timeliness, an excellent basis for 
investigating adverse effects of drugs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-018-2786-z
PMID: 30027343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Methods. 2019 Aug 15;166:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.03.012. Epub 2019 Mar 
22.

IVS2vec: A tool of Inverse Virtual Screening based on word2vec and deep learning 
techniques.

Zhang H(1), Liao L(2), Cai Y(3), Hu Y(3), Wang H(4).

Author information:
(1)Joint Engineering Research Center for Health Big Data Intelligent Analysis 
Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, PR China.
(2)Joint Engineering Research Center for Health Big Data Intelligent Analysis 
Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, PR China; College of Software 
Technology, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Province 315048, PR China.
(3)Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, PR China.
(4)Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong Province 518055, PR China. Electronic address: 
wangh8@sustc.edu.cn.

Inverse Virtual Screening is a powerful technique in the early stage of drug 
discovery process. This technique can provide important clues for biologically 
active molecules, which is useful in the following researches of durg discovery. 
In this work, combining with Word2vec, a natural language processing technique, 
dense fully connected neural network (DFCNN) algorithm is utilized to build up a 
prediction model. This model is able to perform a binary classification. Based 
on the query molecule, the input protein candidates can be classified into two 
subsets. One set is that potential targets with high possibilities to bind with 
the query molecule and the other one is that the proteins with low possibilities 
to bind with the query molecule. This model is named as IVS2vec. IVS2vec also 
can output a score reflecting binding possibility of the association between a 
protein and a molecule, which is useful to improve efficiency of research. We 
applied IVS2vec on several databases related to drug development and shown that 
our model can detect possible therapeutic targets. In addition, our model can 
identify targets related to adverse drug reactions which is useful to improve 
medication safety and repurpose drugs. Moreover, IVS2vec can give a very fast 
speed to perform prediction jobs. It is suitable for processing a large number 
of compounds in the chemical databases. We also find that IVS2vec has potential 
capabilities and outperform other state-of-the-art docking tools such as 
Autodock vina. In this study, IVS2vec brings many convincing results than 
Autodock vina in the reverse target searching case of Quercetin.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2019.03.012
PMID: 30910562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cognit Comput. 2022;14(1):274-299. doi: 10.1007/s12559-021-09903-z. Epub 2021 
Aug 18.

Affective Concept-Based Encoding of Patient Narratives via Sentic Computing and 
Neural Networks.

Grissette H(1), Nfaoui EH(1).

Author information:
(1)LISAC Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences Dhar EL Mahraz, Sidi Mohamed Ben 
Abdellah University, Fez, Morocco.

The automatic generation of features without human intervention is the most 
critical task for biomedical sentiment analysis. Regarding the high dynamicity 
of shared patient narrative data, the lack of formal medical language sentiment 
dictionaries prevents retrieval of the appropriate sentiment, which is 
unapproachable and can be prone to annotator bias. We propose a novel affective 
biomedical concept-based encoding via sentic computing and neural networks. The 
main contributions include four aspects. First, a biomedical embedding, in which 
a medical entity is defined, normalized, and synthesized from a text, is built 
using online patient narratives after being combined with label propagation from 
a widely used comprehensive biomedical vocabulary. Second, considering the 
dependence on biomedical definitions, drug reaction sample selection based on 
general matching is suggested. These feature settings are then used to build and 
recognize affective semantics and sentics based on an extreme learning machine. 
Finally, a semisupervised LSTM-BiLSTM model for biomedical sentiment analysis is 
constructed. There was a massive influx of patient self-reports related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. A study was conducted in this direction, and we tested the 
validity, medical language familiarity, and transferability of our approach by 
analyzing millions of COVID-19 tweets. Comparisons to affective lexicons also 
indicate that integrating extreme learning machine cognitive capabilities has 
advantages over biomedical sentiment analysis. By considering sentics vectors on 
top of the formed embeddings, our semisupervised LSTM-BiLSTM achieved an 
accuracy of 87.5%. The evaluations of unsupervised learning approximated the 
results of the previous model when dealing with a serious loss of biomedical 
data. In this paper, we demonstrate the effectiveness of integrating 
deep-learning-based cognitive capabilities for both enhancing distributed 
biomedical definitions and inferring sentiment compositions from many patient 
self-reports on social networks. The relevant encoding of affective information 
conveyed regarding medication subjects clearly reveals defined roles and 
expectations that can have a positive impact on public health.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s12559-021-09903-z
PMCID: PMC8371039
PMID: 34422122

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


359. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2022 Oct 17. doi: 10.1002/pds.5553. Online ahead of 
print.

Development of a multivariate prediction model to identify individual case 
safety reports which require clinical review.

Gosselt HR(1), Bazelmans EA(1), Lieber T(1), van Hunsel FPAM(1), Härmark L(1).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Centre Lareb, 's-Hertogenbosch, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The number of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) in 
pharmacovigilance databases are rapidly increasing world-wide. The majority of 
ICSRs at the Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Centre Lareb is reviewed manually to 
identify potential signal triggering reports (PSTR) or ICSRs which need further 
clinical assessment for other reasons.
OBJECTIVES: To develop a prediction model to identify ICSRs that require 
clinical review, including PSTRs. Secondly, to identify the most important 
features of these reports.
METHODS: All ICSRs (n = 30 424) received by Lareb between October 1, 2017 and 
February 26, 2021 were included. ICSRs originating from marketing authorisation 
holders and ICSRs reported on vaccines were excluded. The outcome was defined as 
PSTR (yes/no), where PSTR 'yes' was defined as an ICSR discussed at a signal 
detection meeting. Nineteen features were included, concerning structured 
information on: patients, adverse drug reactions (ADR) or drugs. Data were 
divided into a training (70%) and test set (30%) using a stratified split to 
maintain the PSTR/no PSTR ratio. Logistic regression, elastic net logistic 
regression and eXtreme Gradient Boosting models were trained and tuned on a 
training set. Random down-sampling of negative controls was applied on the 
training set to adjust for the imbalanced dataset. Final models were evaluated 
on the test set. Model performances were assessed using the area under the curve 
(AUC) with 95% confidence interval of a receiver operating characteristic (ROC), 
and specificity and precision were assessed at a threshold for perfect 
sensitivity (100%, to not miss any PSTRs). Feature importance plots were 
inspected and a selection of features was used to re-train and test model 
performances with fewer features.
RESULTS: 1439 (4.7%) of reports were PSTR. All three models performed equally 
with a highest AUC of 0.75 (0.73-0.77). Despite moderate model performances, 
specificity (5%) and precision (5%) were low. Most important features were: 
'absence of ADR in the Summary of product characteristics', 'ADR reported as 
serious', 'ADR labelled as an important medical event', 'ADR reported by 
physician' and 'positive rechallenge'. Model performances were similar when 
using only nine of the most important features.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a prediction model with moderate performances to 
identify PSTRs with nine commonly available features. Optimisation of the model 
using more ICSR information (e.g., free text fields) to increase model precision 
is required before implementation.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.5553
PMID: 36251280


360. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):493-510. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01158-3. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Applying Machine Learning in Distributed Data Networks for Pharmacoepidemiologic 
and Pharmacovigilance Studies: Opportunities, Challenges, and Considerations.

Wong J(1), Prieto-Alhambra D(2)(3), Rijnbeek PR(3), Desai RJ(4), Reps JM(5), Toh 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Therapeutics Research and Infectious Disease Epidemiology (TIDE), 
Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School & Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute, 401 Park Drive, Suite 401, East Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(2)Pharmaco- and Device Epidemiology, Centre for Statistics in Medicine, NDORMS, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Titusville, NJ, USA.
(6)Division of Therapeutics Research and Infectious Disease Epidemiology (TIDE), 
Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School & Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute, 401 Park Drive, Suite 401, East Boston, MA, 02215, USA. 
darren_toh@harvardpilgrim.org.

Increasing availability of electronic health databases capturing real-world 
experiences with medical products has garnered much interest in their use for 
pharmacoepidemiologic and pharmacovigilance studies. The traditional practice of 
having numerous groups use single databases to accomplish similar tasks and 
address common questions about medical products can be made more efficient 
through well-coordinated multi-database studies, greatly facilitated through 
distributed data network (DDN) architectures. Access to larger amounts of 
electronic health data within DDNs has created a growing interest in using 
data-adaptive machine learning (ML) techniques that can automatically model 
complex associations in high-dimensional data with minimal human guidance. 
However, the siloed storage and diverse nature of the databases in DDNs create 
unique challenges for using ML. In this paper, we discuss opportunities, 
challenges, and considerations for applying ML in DDNs for pharmacoepidemiologic 
and pharmacovigilance studies. We first discuss major types of activities 
performed by DDNs and how ML may be used. Next, we discuss practical 
data-related factors influencing how DDNs work in practice. We then combine 
these discussions and jointly consider how opportunities for ML are affected by 
practical data-related factors for DDNs, leading to several challenges. We 
present different approaches for addressing these challenges and highlight 
efforts that real-world DDNs have taken or are currently taking to help mitigate 
them. Despite these challenges, the time is ripe for the emerging interest to 
use ML in DDNs, and the utility of these data-adaptive modeling techniques in 
pharmacoepidemiologic and pharmacovigilance studies will likely continue to 
increase in the coming years.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01158-3
PMCID: PMC9112258
PMID: 35579813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JW is a consultant to Hoffmann-La Roche Limited 
for unrelated work. DPA has received grant support from Amgen, Chesi-Taylor, 
Novartis, and UCB Biopharma; his department has received advisory or consultancy 
fees from Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Johnson and Johnson, and UCB Biopharma 
and fees for speaker services from Amgen and UCB Biopharma; Janssen, on behalf 
of IMI-funded EHDEN and EMIF consortiums, and Synapse Management Partners have 
supported training programs organized by DPA’s department and open for external 
participants. PRR works for a research group that has received unconditional 
research grants from Boehringer-Ingelheim, GSK, Janssen Research & Development, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Yamanouchi, and Servier. RJD has served as a principal 
investigator for grants from Bayer, Vertex, and Novartis to Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital. JMR is an employee of Janssen R&D and is a shareholder of Johnson and 
Johnson. ST is a consultant to Pfizer, Inc. and Merck & Co., Inc. for unrelated 
work.


361. Cureus. 2022 Sep 14;14(9):e29162. doi: 10.7759/cureus.29162. eCollection 2022 
Sep.

A Narrative Review of Adverse Event Detection, Monitoring, and Prevention in 
Indian Hospitals.

Verman S(1), Anjankar A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta 
Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha, IND.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha, IND.

An adverse event is any abnormal clinical finding associated with the use of a 
therapy. Adverse events are classified by reporting an event's seriousness, 
expectedness, and relatedness. Monitoring patient safety is of utmost importance 
as more and more data becomes available. In reality, very low numbers of adverse 
events are reported via the official path. Chart review, voluntary reporting, 
computerized surveillance, and direct observation can detect adverse drug 
events. Medication errors are commonly seen in hospitals and need provider and 
system-based interventions to prevent them. The need of the hour in India is to 
develop and implement medication safety best practices to avoid adverse events. 
The utility of artificial intelligence techniques in adverse event detection 
remains unexplored, and their accuracy and precision need to be studied in a 
controlled setting. There is a need to develop predictive models to assess the 
likelihood of adverse reactions while testing novel pharmaceutical drugs.

Copyright © 2022, Verman et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.29162
PMCID: PMC9564564
PMID: 36258971

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


362. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2019 Jan 10;19(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s12911-018-0717-4.

A classification framework for exploiting sparse multi-variate temporal features 
with application to adverse drug event detection in medical records.

Bagattini F(1), Karlsson I(2), Rebane J(3), Papapetrou P(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell'Informazione, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden. isak-kar@dsv.su.se.
(3)Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Adverse drug events (ADEs) as well as other preventable adverse 
events in the hospital setting incur a yearly monetary cost of approximately 
$3.5 billion, in the United States alone. Therefore, it is of paramount 
importance to reduce the impact and prevalence of ADEs within the healthcare 
sector, not only since it will result in reducing human suffering, but also as a 
means to substantially reduce economical strains on the healthcare system. One 
approach to mitigate this problem is to employ predictive models. While existing 
methods have been focusing on the exploitation of static features, limited 
attention has been given to temporal features.
METHODS: In this paper, we present a novel classification framework for 
detecting ADEs in complex Electronic health records (EHRs) by exploiting the 
temporality and sparsity of the underlying features. The proposed framework 
consists of three phases for transforming sparse and multi-variate time series 
features into a single-valued feature representation, which can then be used by 
any classifier. Moreover, we propose and evaluate three different strategies for 
leveraging feature sparsity by incorporating it into the new representation.
RESULTS: A large-scale evaluation on 15 ADE datasets extracted from a real-world 
EHR system shows that the proposed framework achieves significantly improved 
predictive performance compared to state-of-the-art. Moreover, our framework can 
reveal features that are clinically consistent with medical findings on ADE 
detection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study and experimental findings demonstrate that temporal 
multi-variate features of variable length and with high sparsity can be 
effectively utilized to predict ADEs from EHRs. Two key advantages of our 
framework are that it is method agnostic, i.e., versatile, and of low 
computational cost, i.e., fast; hence providing an important building block for 
future exploitation within the domain of machine learning from EHRs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-018-0717-4
PMCID: PMC6327495
PMID: 30630486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
use of the HealthBank has been approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in 
Stockholm (permission number 2012/834-31/5). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


363. Int J Med Inform. 2005 Aug;74(7-8):563-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.04.006.

Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance using a 
knowledge-based approach.

Bousquet C(1), Henegar C, Louët AL, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U729, Faculté de médecine Broussais Hôtel Dieu, 15 rue de l'Ecole de 
Médecine, 75006 Paris, France. cedric.bousquet@spim.jussieu.fr

Automated signal generation is a growing field in pharmacovigilance that relies 
on data mining of huge spontaneous reporting systems for detecting unknown 
adverse drug reactions (ADR). Previous implementations of quantitative 
techniques did not take into account issues related to the medical dictionary 
for regulatory activities (MedDRA) terminology used for coding ADRs. MedDRA is a 
first generation terminology lacking formal definitions; grouping of similar 
medical conditions is not accurate due to taxonomic limitations. Our objective 
was to build a data-mining tool that improves signal detection algorithms by 
performing terminological reasoning on MedDRA codes described with the DAML+OIL 
description logic. We propose the PharmaMiner tool that implements quantitative 
techniques based on underlying statistical and bayesian models. It is a JAVA 
application displaying results in tabular format and performing terminological 
reasoning with the Racer inference engine. The mean frequency of drug-adverse 
effect associations in the French database was 2.66. Subsumption reasoning based 
on MedDRA taxonomical hierarchy produced a mean number of occurrence of 2.92 
versus 3.63 (p < 0.001) obtained with a combined technique using subsumption and 
approximate matching reasoning based on the ontological structure. Semantic 
integration of terminological systems with data mining methods is a promising 
technique for improving machine learning in medical databases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.04.006
PMID: 15955732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2018 Oct 1;25(10):1339-1350. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy077.

Learning predictive models of drug side-effect relationships from distributed 
representations of literature-derived semantic predications.

Mower J(1), Subramanian D(2), Cohen T(3).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Quantitative and Computational Biosciences, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center 
Houston, Texas, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work is to leverage relational information extracted 
from biomedical literature using a novel synthesis of unsupervised pretraining, 
representational composition, and supervised machine learning for drug safety 
monitoring.
METHODS: Using ≈80 million concept-relationship-concept triples extracted from 
the literature using the SemRep Natural Language Processing system, distributed 
vector representations (embeddings) were generated for concepts as functions of 
their relationships utilizing two unsupervised representational approaches. 
Embeddings for drugs and side effects of interest from two widely used reference 
standards were then composed to generate embeddings of drug/side-effect pairs, 
which were used as input for supervised machine learning. This methodology was 
developed and evaluated using cross-validation strategies and compared to 
contemporary approaches. To qualitatively assess generalization, models trained 
on the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) drug/side-effect 
reference set were evaluated against a list of ≈1100 drugs from an online 
database.
RESULTS: The employed method improved performance over previous approaches. 
Cross-validation results advance the state of the art (AUC 0.96; F1 0.90 and AUC 
0.95; F1 0.84 across the two sets), outperforming methods utilizing literature 
and/or spontaneous reporting system data. Examination of predictions for unseen 
drug/side-effect pairs indicates the ability of these methods to generalize, 
with over tenfold label support enrichment in the top 100 predictions versus the 
bottom 100 predictions.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Our methods can assist the pharmacovigilance process 
using information from the biomedical literature. Unsupervised pretraining 
generates a rich relationship-based representational foundation for machine 
learning techniques to classify drugs in the context of a putative side effect, 
given known examples.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy077
PMCID: PMC6454491
PMID: 30010902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Jun 1;26(6):580-581. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy192.

Reply to comment on: "Deep learning for pharmacovigilance: recurrent neural 
network architectures for labeling adverse drug reactions in Twitter posts".

Cocos A(1), Fiks AG(1), Masino AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment on
    J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Jun 1;26(6):577-579.

We appreciate the detailed review provided by Magge et al1 of our article, "Deep 
learning for pharmacovigilance: recurrent neural network architectures for 
labeling adverse drug reactions in Twitter posts." 2 In their letter, they 
present a subjective criticism that rests on concerns about our dataset 
composition and potential misinterpretation of comparisons to existing methods. 
Our article underwent two rounds of extensive peer review and has been cited 28 
times1 in the nearly 2 years since it was published online (February 2017). 
Neither the reviewers nor the citing authors raised similar concerns. There are, 
however, portions of the commentary that highlight areas of our work that would 
benefit from further clarification.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy192
PMCID: PMC7647328
PMID: 30980667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Jun 1;26(6):577-579. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz013.

Comment on: "Deep learning for pharmacovigilance: recurrent neural network 
architectures for labeling adverse drug reactions in Twitter posts".

Magge A(1), Sarker A(2), Nikfarjam A(2), Gonzalez-Hernandez G(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Scottsdale, Arizona, 
USA.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 Jun 1;26(6):580-581.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz013
PMCID: PMC6515520
PMID: 31087070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2015 Nov 5;2015:1371-80. eCollection 2015.

Handling Temporality of Clinical Events for Drug Safety Surveillance.

Zhao J(1), Henriksson A(1), Kvist M(2), Asker L(1), Boström H(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden.
(2)Dept. of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden; Dept. 
of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden.

Using longitudinal data in electronic health records (EHRs) for post-marketing 
adverse drug event (ADE) detection allows for monitoring patients throughout 
their medical history. Machine learning methods have been shown to be efficient 
and effective in screening health records and detecting ADEs. How best to 
exploit historical data, as encoded by clinical events in EHRs is, however, not 
very well understood. In this study, three strategies for handling temporality 
of clinical events are proposed and evaluated using an EHR database from 
Stockholm, Sweden. The random forest learning algorithm is applied to predict 
fourteen ADEs using clinical events collected from different lengths of patient 
history. The results show that, in general, including longer patient history 
leads to improved predictive performance, and that assigning weights to events 
according to time distance from the ADE yields the biggest improvement.

PMCID: PMC4765556
PMID: 26958278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):583-596. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01159-2. Epub 2022 May 
17.

Supervised Machine Learning-Based Decision Support for Signal Validation 
Classification.

Imran M(1), Bhatti A(2), King DM(3), Lerch M(4), Dietrich J(5), Doron G(6), 
Manlik K(7).

Author information:
(1)Bayer AG, Digital Transformation and Information Technology Pharma, Decision 
Science and Advanced Analytics for Medical Affairs, Pharmacovigilance and 
Regulatory Affairs, Müllerstr. 178, 13353, Berlin, Germany. 
muhammad.imran5@bayer.com.
(2)Bayer US LLC, Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacovigilance, Benefit-Risk Management TA 
Radiology, Whippany, NJ, USA.
(3)Bayer US LLC, Digital Transformation and Information Technology Pharma, 
Adverse Event Management, Morristown, NJ, USA.
(4)Lenolution GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacovigilance, Innovation and Digitalization, 
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacovigilance, R&D, Data Sciences, Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacovigilance, Data Science and Insight 
Generation, Berlin, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Signal validation in pharmacovigilance is the process of 
evaluating data to decide whether evidence is sufficient to justify further 
assessment of a detected signal. During the signal validation process, safety 
experts in our organization are required to review signals of disproportionate 
reporting (SDRs) and classify them into one of six predefined categories.
OBJECTIVE: This experiment explored the extent to which predictive machine 
learning (ML) models can support the decision making of safety experts by 
accurately identifying the most appropriate predefined signal validation 
category.
METHODS: We extracted cumulative data for six medicinal products, consisting of 
historic SDR validations and Individual Case Safety Reports, from the company's 
safety database for training and testing of the ML model. We implemented a 
decision tree-based supervised multiclass classifier model termed Gradient 
Boosted Trees followed by a SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis to 
mitigate the "black box" effect of the ensemble model by identifying the key 
predicting features in the model. Following a retrospective analysis, a 
prospective experiment was conducted to test the model accuracy and user 
acceptance in a real-life setting.
RESULTS: The prediction accuracy of our ML model ranged from 83 to 86% over 3 
months for the six medicinal products. The applicability of the model was 
confirmed by the company's safety experts. Additionally, the systematic 
predictions provided valuable information to the safety experts and assisted 
them in reviewing the SDRs efficiently and consistently.
CONCLUSIONS: This experiment demonstrated that it is possible to train a 
multiclass classification model to accurately predict signal validation 
categories for SDRs. More importantly, the transparency of the predictions 
provided by the SHAP analysis led to high acceptance by the safety experts.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01159-2
PMCID: PMC9114067
PMID: 35579820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Aasia Bhatti holds shares in Bayer AG. Muhammad 
Imran, Aasia Bhatti, David King, Magnus Lerch, Jürgen Dietrich, Guy Doron, and 
Katrin Manlik have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the 
content of this experiment. Muhammad Imran, Jürgen Dietrich, Guy Doron, and 
Katrin Manlik are full-time employees of Bayer AG. Aasia Bhatti and David King 
are full-time employees of Bayer US LLC. The views expressed in this article are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policies or 
position of Bayer AG, Bayer US LLC or Lenolution GmbH.


369. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Mar 16;22(6):2310. doi: 10.3390/s22062310.

Dependency Factors in Evidence Theory: An Analysis in an Information Fusion 
Scenario Applied in Adverse Drug Reactions.

Ribeiro LAPA(1), Garcia ACB(1), Dos Santos PSM(1).

Author information:
(1)PPGI-Informatics Department, UNIRIO Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 22290-240, Brazil.

Multisensor information fusion brings challenges such as data heterogeneity, 
source precision, and the merger of uncertainties that impact the quality of 
classifiers. A widely used approach for classification problems in a multisensor 
context is the Dempster-Shafer Theory. This approach considers the beliefs 
attached to each source to consolidate the information concerning the hypotheses 
to come up with a classifier with higher precision. Nevertheless, the 
fundamental premise for using the approach is that sources are independent and 
that the classification hypotheses are mutually exclusive. Some approaches 
ignore this premise, which can lead to unreliable results. There are other 
approaches, based on statistics and machine learning techniques, that expurgate 
the dependencies or include a discount factor to mitigate the risk of 
dependencies. We propose a novel approach based on Bayesian net, Pearson's test, 
and linear regression to adjust the beliefs for more accurate data fusion, 
mitigating possible correlations or dependencies. We tested our approach by 
applying it in the domain of adverse drug reactions discovery. The experiment 
used nine databases containing data from 50,000 active patients of a Brazilian 
cancer hospital, including clinical exams, laboratory tests, physicians' 
anamnesis, medical prescriptions, clinical notes, medicine leaflets packages, 
international classification of disease, and sickness diagnosis models. This 
study had the hospital's ethical committee approval. A statistically significant 
improvement in the precision and recall of the results was obtained compared 
with existing approaches. The results obtained show that the credibility index 
proposed by the model significantly increases the quality of the evidence 
generated with the algorithm Random Forest. A benchmark was performed between 
three datasets, incremented gradually with attributes of a credibility index, 
obtaining a precision of 92%. Finally, we performed a benchmark with a public 
base of heart disease, achieving good results.

DOI: 10.3390/s22062310
PMCID: PMC8949085
PMID: 35336480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


370. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 26;23(15):8235. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158235.

Usefulness of Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System for Machine-Learning Based 
Vaccine Research: A Case Study for COVID-19 Vaccines.

Flora J(1), Khan W(2), Jin J(1), Jin D(3), Hussain A(4), Dajani K(1), Khan 
B(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, California State University 
San Bernardino, 5500 University Parkway, San Bernardino, CA 92407, USA.
(2)School of Computer Science and Mathematics, Liverpool John Moores University, 
Liverpool L3 3AF, UK.
(3)Division of Vascular & Interventional Radiology, Department of Radiology, 
Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA.
(4)Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Sharjah, Sharjah P.O. Box 
27272, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Institute of the Environment and Sustainability, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Usefulness of Vaccine-Adverse Event-Reporting System (VAERS) data and protocols 
required for statistical analyses were pinpointed with a set of recommendations 
for the application of machine learning modeling or exploratory analyses on 
VAERS data with a case study of COVID-19 vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, 
Janssen). A total of 262,454 duplicate reports (29%) from 905,976 reports were 
identified, which were merged into a total of 643,522 distinct reports. A 
customized online survey was also conducted providing 211 reports. A total of 20 
highest reported adverse events were first identified. Differences in results 
after applying various machine learning algorithms (association rule mining, 
self-organizing maps, hierarchical clustering, bipartite graphs) on VAERS data 
were noticed. Moderna reports showed injection-site-related AEs of higher 
frequencies by 15.2%, consistent with the online survey (12% higher reporting 
rate for pain in the muscle for Moderna compared to Pfizer-BioNTech). AEs 
{headache, pyrexia, fatigue, chills, pain, dizziness} constituted &gt;50% of the 
total reports. Chest pain in male children reports was 295% higher than in 
female children reports. Penicillin and sulfa were of the highest frequencies 
(22%, and 19%, respectively). Analysis of uncleaned VAERS data demonstrated 
major differences from the above (7% variations). Spelling/grammatical mistakes 
in allergies were discovered (e.g., ~14% reports with incorrect spellings for 
penicillin).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158235
PMCID: PMC9368306
PMID: 35897804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


371. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2006;2006:369-73.

Clustering WHO-ART terms using semantic distance and machine learning 
algorithms.

Iavindrasana J(1), Bousquet C, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC.

Author information:
(1)University Hospitals of Geneva - CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

WHO-ART was developed by the WHO collaborating centre for international drug 
monitoring in order to code adverse drug reactions. We assume that computation 
of semantic distance between WHO-ART terms may be an efficient way to group 
related medical conditions in the WHO database in order to improve signal 
detection. Our objective was to develop a method for clustering WHO-ART terms 
according to some proximity of their meanings. Our material comprises 758 
WHO-ART terms. A formal definition was acquired for each term as a list of 
elementary concepts belonging to SNOMED international axes and characterized by 
modifier terms in some cases. Clustering was implemented as a terminology 
service on a J2EE server. Two different unsupervised machine learning algorithms 
(KMeans, Pvclust) clustered WHO-ART terms according to a semantic distance 
operator previously described. Pvclust grouped 51% of WHO-ART terms. K-Means 
grouped 100% of WHO-ART terms but 25% clusters were heterogeneous with k = 180 
clusters and 6% clusters were heterogeneous with k = 32 clusters. Clustering 
algorithms associated to semantic distance could suggest potential groupings of 
WHO-ART terms that need validation according to the user's requirements.

PMCID: PMC1839713
PMID: 17238365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2022 Jun 23. doi: 10.1002/pds.5501. Online ahead of 
print.

Artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance: Do we need explainability?

Hauben M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Inc., New York, New York, USA.
(2)NYU Langone Health, New York, New York, USA.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.5501
PMID: 35747938


373. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2017 Feb 10;2016:1940-1949. eCollection 2016.

Classification-by-Analogy: Using Vector Representations of Implicit 
Relationships to Identify Plausibly Causal Drug/Side-effect Relationships.

Mower J(1), Subramanian D(2), Shang N(3), Cohen T(1).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas;; University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas.
(2)Rice University, Houston, Texas.
(3)Columbia University, New York, New York.

An important aspect of post-marketing drug surveillance involves identifying 
potential side-effects utilizing adverse drug event (ADE) reporting systems 
and/or Electronic Health Records. These data are noisy, necessitating identified 
drug/ADE associations be manually reviewed - a human-intensive process that 
scales poorly with large numbers of possibly dangerous associations and rapid 
growth of biomedical literature. Recent work has employed Literature Based 
Discovery methods that exploit implicit relationships between biomedical 
entities within the literature to estimate the plausibility of drug/ADE 
connections. We extend this work by evaluating machine learning classifiers 
applied to high-dimensional vector representations of relationships extracted 
from the literature as a means to identify substantiated drug/ADE connections. 
Using a curated reference standard, we show applying classifiers to such 
representations improves performance (+≈37%AUC) over previous approaches. These 
trained systems reproduce outcomes of the manual literature review process used 
to create the reference standard, but further research is required to establish 
their generalizability.

PMCID: PMC5333205
PMID: 28269953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. JAMA Oncol. 2018 Apr 1;4(4):581-583. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.5688.

Detecting Chemotherapeutic Skin Adverse Reactions in Social Health Networks 
Using Deep Learning.

Ransohoff JD(1), Nikfarjam A(2), Jones E(3), Loew B(3), Kwong BY(1), Sarin 
KY(1), Shah NH(2).

Author information:
(1)Stanford School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Stanford, California.
(2)Division of Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California.
(3)Inspire, Arlington, Virginia.

This study reports proof-of-principle early detection of 
chemotherapeutic-associated skin adverse drug reactions from social health 
networks using a deep learning–based signal generation pipeline to capture how 
patients describe cutaneous eruptions.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.5688
PMCID: PMC5885179
PMID: 29494731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.


375. SAR QSAR Environ Res. 2017 Oct;28(10):863-874. doi: 
10.1080/1062936X.2017.1399925.

In silico prediction of multiple-category classification model for cytochrome 
P450 inhibitors and non-inhibitors using machine-learning method.

Lee JH(1), Basith S(1), Cui M(1), Kim B(1), Choi S(1).

Author information:
(1)a National Leading Research Laboratory (NLRL) of Molecular Modeling & Drug 
Design, College of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , 
Ewha Womans University , Seoul , Republic of Korea.

The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme superfamily is involved in phase I metabolism 
which chemically modifies a variety of substrates via oxidative reactions to 
make them more water-soluble and easier to eliminate. Inhibition of these 
enzymes leads to undesirable effects, including toxic drug accumulations and 
adverse drug-drug interactions. Hence, it is necessary to develop in silico 
models that can predict the inhibition potential of compounds for different CYP 
isoforms. This study focused on five major CYP isoforms, including CYP1A2, 2C9, 
2C19, 2D6 and 3A4, that are responsible for more than 90% of the metabolism of 
clinical drugs. The main aim of this study is to develop a multiple-category 
classification model (MCM) for the major CYP isoforms using a Laplacian-modified 
naïve Bayesian method. The dataset composed of more than 4500 compounds was 
collected from the PubChem Bioassay database. VolSurf+ descriptors and FCFP_8 
fingerprint were used as input features to build classification models. The 
results demonstrated that the developed MCM using Laplacian-modified naïve 
Bayesian method was successful in classifying inhibitors and non-inhibitors for 
each CYP isoform. Moreover, the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity values for 
both training and test sets were above 80% and also yielded satisfactory area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve and Matthews correlation 
coefficient values.

DOI: 10.1080/1062936X.2017.1399925
PMID: 29183231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017 Sep 1;24(5):913-920. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocx022.

Development of an automated assessment tool for MedWatch reports in the FDA 
adverse event reporting system.

Han L(1), Ball R(2), Pamer CA(2), Altman RB(3)(4), Proestel S(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Training Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(2)Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University.

OBJECTIVE: As the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) receives over a million 
adverse event reports associated with medication use every year, a system is 
needed to aid FDA safety evaluators in identifying reports most likely to 
demonstrate causal relationships to the suspect medications. We combined text 
mining with machine learning to construct and evaluate such a system to identify 
medication-related adverse event reports.
METHODS: FDA safety evaluators assessed 326 reports for medication-related 
causality. We engineered features from these reports and constructed random 
forest, L1 regularized logistic regression, and support vector machine models. 
We evaluated model accuracy and further assessed utility by generating report 
rankings that represented a prioritized report review process.
RESULTS: Our random forest model showed the best performance in report ranking 
and accuracy, with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 
0.66. The generated report ordering assigns reports with a higher probability of 
medication-related causality a higher rank and is significantly correlated to a 
perfect report ordering, with a Kendall's tau of 0.24 ( P  = .002).
CONCLUSION: Our models produced prioritized report orderings that enable FDA 
safety evaluators to focus on reports that are more likely to contain valuable 
medication-related adverse event information. Applying our models to all FDA 
adverse event reports has the potential to streamline the manual review process 
and greatly reduce reviewer workload.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 2017. This work is written by US Government employees 
and is in the public domain in the United States.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocx022
PMCID: PMC7651970
PMID: 28371826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Reprod Toxicol. 2022 Oct;113:150-154. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2022.09.001. Epub 
2022 Sep 5.

Development and validation of a machine-learning algorithm to predict the 
relevance of scientific articles within the field of teratology.

Habets PC(1), van IJzendoorn DG(2), Vinkers CH(2), Härmark L(3), de Vries LC(3), 
Otte WM(4).

Author information:
(1)DeepDoc Academy, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
p.c.habets@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)DeepDoc Academy, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Centre Lareb, 's-Hertogenbosch, the 
Netherlands.
(4)DeepDoc Academy, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Child Neurology, 
UMC Utrecht Brain Center, University Medical Center (UMC) Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.

The Dutch Teratology Information Service Lareb counsels healthcare professionals 
and patients about medication use during pregnancy and lactation. To keep the 
evidence up to date, employees perform a standardized weekly PubMed query where 
relevant literature is identified manually. We aimed to develop an accurate 
machine-learning algorithm to predict the relevance of PubMed entries, thereby 
reducing the labor-intensive task of manually screening the articles. We 
fine-tuned a pre-trained natural language processing transformer model to 
identify relevant entries. We split 15,540 labeled entries into 
case-control-balanced train, validation, and test datasets. Additionally, we 
externally validated the model prospectively with 1288 labeled entries obtained 
from weekly queries after developing the model. This dataset was also 
independently labeled by a team of six experienced human raters to evaluate our 
model's performance. The validation of our machine learning model on the 
retrospectively collected outheld dataset obtained an area under the 
sensitivity-versus-specificity curve of 89.3 % (CI: 88.2- 90.4). In the 
prospective external validation of the model, our model classified relevant 
literature with a sensitivity versus specificity curve area of 87.4 % (CI: 
85.0-89.8). Our model achieved a higher sensitivity than the human raters' team 
without sacrificing too much specificity. The team of human raters showed weak 
to moderate levels of agreement in their article classifications (kappa range 
0.40-0.64). The human selection of the latest relevant literature is 
indispensable to keep the teratology information up to date. We show that 
automatic preselection of relevant abstracts using machine learning is possible 
without sacrificing the selection performance.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2022.09.001
PMID: 36067870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


378. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58:280-287. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 
Nov 7.

Crowdsourcing Twitter annotations to identify first-hand experiences of 
prescription drug use.

Alvaro N(1), Conway M(2), Doan S(3), Lofi C(4), Overington J(5), Collier N(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Informatics, National Institute of Informatics, Japan; The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Japan. Electronic address: 
nestoralvaro@nii.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, USA. Electronic 
address: mike.conway@utah.edu.
(3)Medical Informatics, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, USA. Electronic 
address: Son.Doan@kp.org.
(4)Institute for Information Systems, Technische Universität Braunschweig, 
Germany. Electronic address: lofi@ifis.cs.tu-bs.de.
(5)Stratified Medical, London, UK. Electronic address: 
john.overington@stratifiedmedical.com.
(6)Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge, 
UK; European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Cambridge, UK. Electronic 
address: nhc30@cam.ac.uk.

Self-reported patient data has been shown to be a valuable knowledge source for 
post-market pharmacovigilance. In this paper we propose using the popular 
micro-blogging service Twitter to gather evidence about adverse drug reactions 
(ADRs) after firstly having identified micro-blog messages (also know as 
"tweets") that report first-hand experience. In order to achieve this goal we 
explore machine learning with data crowdsourced from laymen annotators. With the 
help of lay annotators recruited from CrowdFlower we manually annotated 1548 
tweets containing keywords related to two kinds of drugs: SSRIs (eg. 
Paroxetine), and cognitive enhancers (eg. Ritalin). Our results show that 
inter-annotator agreement (Fleiss' kappa) for crowdsourcing ranks in moderate 
agreement with a pair of experienced annotators (Spearman's Rho=0.471). We 
utilized the gold standard annotations from CrowdFlower for automatically 
training a range of supervised machine learning models to recognize first-hand 
experience. F-Score values are reported for 6 of these techniques with the 
Bayesian Generalized Linear Model being the best (F-Score=0.64 and 
Informedness=0.43) when combined with a selected set of features obtained by 
using information gain criteria.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.11.004
PMID: 26556646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Front Artif Intell. 2022 Feb 25;5:859700. doi: 10.3389/frai.2022.859700. 
eCollection 2022.

Editorial: Unleashing Innovation on Precision Public Health-Highlights From the 
MCBIOS and MAQC 2021 Joint Conference.

Homayouni R(1), Hong H(2), Manda P(3), Nanduri B(4), Toby IT(5).

Author information:
(1)Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, MI, United 
States.
(2)National Center for Toxicological Research, United States Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, AR, United States.
(3)University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC, United States.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS, United States.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Dallas, Irving, TX, United States.

Comment on
    Editorial on the Research Topic Editorial: Unleashing Innovation on 
Precision Public Health–Highlights From the MCBIOS and MAQC 2021 Joint 
Conference.

DOI: 10.3389/frai.2022.859700
PMCID: PMC8916102
PMID: 35280236

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


380. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jul 6;13:910205. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.910205. 
eCollection 2022.

Detection of Synergistic Interaction on an Additive Scale Between Two Drugs on 
Abnormal Elevation of Serum Alanine Aminotransferase Using Machine-Learning 
Algorithms.

Akimoto H(1), Nagashima T(1), Minagawa K(2), Hayakawa T(1), Takahashi Y(2), Asai 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Nihon University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Genomic Epidemiology and Clinical Trials, Clinical Trials 
Research Center, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a common adverse drug reaction, with 
abnormal elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Several clinical 
studies have investigated whether a combination of two drugs alters the 
reporting frequency of DILI using traditional statistical methods such as 
multiple logistic regression (MLR), but this model may over-fit the data. This 
study aimed to detect a synergistic interaction between two drugs on the risk of 
abnormal elevation of serum ALT in Japanese adult patients using three 
machine-learning algorithms: MLR, logistic least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator (LASSO) regression, and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) 
algorithms. A total of 58,413 patients were extracted from Nihon University 
School of Medicine's Clinical Data Warehouse and assigned to case (N = 4,152) 
and control (N = 54,261) groups. The MLR model over-fitted a training set. In 
the logistic LASSO regression model, three combinations showed relative excess 
risk due to interaction (RERI) for abnormal elevation of serum ALT: diclofenac 
and famotidine (RERI 2.427, 95% bootstrap confidence interval 1.226-11.003), 
acetaminophen and ambroxol (0.540, 0.087-4.625), and aspirin and cilostazol 
(0.188, 0.135-3.010). Moreover, diclofenac (adjusted odds ratio 1.319, 95% 
bootstrap confidence interval 1.189-2.821) and famotidine (1.643, 1.332-2.071) 
individually affected the risk of abnormal elevation of serum ALT. In the 
XGBoost model, not only the individual effects of diclofenac (feature importance 
0.004) and famotidine (0.016), but also the interaction term (0.004) was 
included in important predictors. Although further study is needed, the 
combination of diclofenac and famotidine appears to increase the risk of 
abnormal elevation of serum ALT in the real world.

Copyright © 2022 Akimoto, Nagashima, Minagawa, Hayakawa, Takahashi and Asai.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.910205
PMCID: PMC9298751
PMID: 35873565

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


381. Database (Oxford). 2016 Mar 25;2016:baw036. doi: 10.1093/database/baw036. Print 
2016.

CD-REST: a system for extracting chemical-induced disease relation in 
literature.

Xu J(1), Wu Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang J(1), Lee HJ(1), Xu H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA hua.xu@uth.tmc.edu.

Mining chemical-induced disease relations embedded in the vast biomedical 
literature could facilitate a wide range of computational biomedical 
applications, such as pharmacovigilance. The BioCreative V organized a Chemical 
Disease Relation (CDR) Track regarding chemical-induced disease relation 
extraction from biomedical literature in 2015. We participated in all subtasks 
of this challenge. In this article, we present our participation system Chemical 
Disease Relation Extraction SysTem (CD-REST), an end-to-end system for 
extracting chemical-induced disease relations in biomedical literature. CD-REST 
consists of two main components: (1) a chemical and disease named entity 
recognition and normalization module, which employs the Conditional Random 
Fields algorithm for entity recognition and a Vector Space Model-based approach 
for normalization; and (2) a relation extraction module that classifies both 
sentence-level and document-level candidate drug-disease pairs by support vector 
machines. Our system achieved the best performance on the chemical-induced 
disease relation extraction subtask in the BioCreative V CDR Track, 
demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed machine learning-based 
approaches for automatic extraction of chemical-induced disease relations in 
biomedical literature. The CD-REST system provides web services using HTTP POST 
request. The web services can be accessed fromhttp://clinicalnlptool.com/cdr The 
online CD-REST demonstration system is available 
athttp://clinicalnlptool.com/cdr/cdr.html. Database 
URL:http://clinicalnlptool.com/cdr;http://clinicalnlptool.com/cdr/cdr.html.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baw036
PMCID: PMC4808251
PMID: 27016700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Neural Comput Appl. 2021 Oct 29:1-9. doi: 10.1007/s00521-021-06614-2. Online 
ahead of print.

Using weak supervision to generate training datasets from social media data: a 
proof of concept to identify drug mentions.

Tekumalla R(1), Banda JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA USA.

Twitter has been a remarkable resource for research in pharmacovigilance in the 
last decade. Traditionally, rule- or lexicon-based methods have been utilized 
for automatically extracting drug tweets for human annotation. The process of 
human annotation to create labeled sets for machine learning models is 
laborious, time consuming and not scalable. In this work, we demonstrate the 
feasibility of applying weak supervision (noisy labeling) to select drug data, 
and build machine learning models using large amounts of noisy labeled data 
instead of limited gold standard labelled sets. Our results demonstrate the 
models built with large amounts of noisy data achieve similar performance than 
models trained on limited gold standard datasets, hence demonstrating that weak 
supervision helps reduce the need to rely on manual annotation, allowing more 
data to be easily labeled and useful for downstream machine learning 
applications, in this case drug mention identification.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of 
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s00521-021-06614-2
PMCID: PMC8554513
PMID: 34728902

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


383. Anesth Analg. 2022 May 1;134(5):900-908. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000005966.

Future of Perioperative Precision Medicine: Integration of Molecular Science, 
Dynamic Health Care Informatics, and Implementation of Predictive Pathways in 
Real Time.

Nirvik P(1), Kertai MD(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee.

Comment in
    Anesth Analg. 2022 May 1;134(5):896-899.

Conceptually, precision medicine is a deep dive to discover disease origin at 
the molecular or genetic level, thus providing insights that allow clinicians to 
design corresponding individualized patient therapies. We know that a disease 
state is created by not only certain molecular derangements but also a biologic 
milieu promoting the expression of such derangements. These factors together 
lead to manifested symptoms. At the level of molecular definition, every 
average, "similar" individual stands to be "dissimilar." Hence, there is the 
need for customized therapy, moving away from therapy based on aggregate 
statistics. The perioperative state is a mix of several, simultaneously active 
molecular mechanisms, surgical insult, drugs, severe inflammatory response, and 
the body's continuous adaptation to maintain a state of homeostasis. 
Postoperative outcomes are a net result of several of those rapid genetic and 
molecular transformations that do or do not ensue. With the advent and advances 
of artificial intelligence, the translation from identifying these intricate 
mechanisms to implementing them in clinical practice has made a huge leap. 
Precision medicine is gaining ground with the help of personalized health 
recorders and personal devices that identify disease mechanics, patient-reported 
outcomes, adverse drug reactions, and drug-drug interaction at the individual 
level in a closed-loop feedback system. This phenomenon is especially true given 
increasing surgeries in older adults, many of whom are on multiple medications 
and varyingly frail. In this era of precision medicine, to provide a 
comprehensive remedy, the perioperative surgical home must expand, incorporating 
not only clinicians but also basic science experts and data scientists.

Copyright © 2022 International Anesthesia Research Society.

DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000005966
PMID: 35320133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


384. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2016 Aug;2016:3314-3320. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591437.

Learning approaches to improve prediction of drug sensitivity in breast cancer 
patients.

Turki T, Zhi Wei.

Predicting drug response to cancer disease is an important problem in modern 
clinical oncology that attracted increasing recent attention from various 
domains such as computational biology, machine learning, and data mining. Cancer 
patients respond differently to each cancer therapy owing to disease diversity, 
genetic factors, and environmental causes. Thus, oncologists aim to identify the 
effective therapies for cancer patients and avoid adverse drug reactions in 
patients. By predicting the drug response to cancer, oncologists gain full 
understanding of the effective treatments on each patient, which leads to better 
personalized treatment. In this paper, we present three learning approaches to 
improve the prediction of breast cancer patients' response to chemotherapy drug: 
the instance selection approach, the oversampling approach, and the hybrid 
approach. We evaluate the performance of our approaches and compare them against 
the baseline approach using the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) on clinical trial 
data, in addition to testing the stability of the approaches. Our experimental 
results show the stability of our approaches giving the highest AUC with 
statistical significance.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591437
PMID: 28269014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Jun 13;19(Suppl 8):210. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2198-y.

Identifying tweets of personal health experience through word embedding and LSTM 
neural network.

Jiang K(1), Feng S(2), Song Q(2), Calix RA(2), Gupta M(2), Bernard GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Information Technology and Graphics, Purdue University 
Northwest, Hammond, IN, USA. kjiang@pnw.edu.
(2)Department of Computer Information Technology and Graphics, Purdue University 
Northwest, Hammond, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: As Twitter has become an active data source for health surveillance 
research, it is important that efficient and effective methods are developed to 
identify tweets related to personal health experience. Conventional 
classification algorithms rely on features engineered by human domain experts, 
and engineering such features is a challenging task and requires much human 
intelligence. The resultant features may not be optimal for the classification 
problem, and can make it challenging for conventional classifiers to correctly 
predict personal experience tweets (PETs) due to the various ways to express 
and/or describe personal experience in tweets. In this study, we developed a 
method that combines word embedding and long short-term memory (LSTM) model 
without the need to engineer any specific features. Through word embedding, 
tweet texts were represented as dense vectors which in turn were fed to the LSTM 
neural network as sequences.
RESULTS: Statistical analyses of the results of 10-fold cross-validations of our 
method and conventional methods indicate that there exist significant 
differences (p < 0.01) in performance measures of accuracy, precision, recall, 
F1-score, and ROC/AUC, demonstrating that our approach outperforms the 
conventional methods in identifying PETs.
CONCLUSION: We presented an efficient and effective method of identifying 
health-related personal experience tweets by combining word embedding and an 
LSTM neural network. It is conceivable that our method can help accelerate and 
scale up analyzing textual data of social media for health surveillance 
purposes, because of no need for the laborious and costly process of engineering 
features.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2198-y
PMCID: PMC5998756
PMID: 29897323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
protocol of this project was reviewed and approved for compliance with the human 
subject research regulation by the Institutional Review Board of Purdue 
University. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


386. Vaccines (Basel). 2022 Jan 11;10(1):103. doi: 10.3390/vaccines10010103.

Using a Machine Learning Approach to Monitor COVID-19 Vaccine Adverse Events 
(VAE) from Twitter Data.

Lian AT(1), Du J(2), Tang L(3).

Author information:
(1)The Kinkaid School, Houston, TX 77024, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Communication, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, 
USA.

Social media can be used to monitor the adverse effects of vaccines. The goal of 
this project is to develop a machine learning and natural language processing 
approach to identify COVID-19 vaccine adverse events (VAE) from Twitter data. 
Based on COVID-19 vaccine-related tweets (1 December 2020-1 August 2021), we 
built a machine learning-based pipeline to identify tweets containing personal 
experiences with COVID-19 vaccinations and to extract and normalize VAE-related 
entities, including dose(s); vaccine types (Pfizer, Moderna, and Johnson & 
Johnson); and symptom(s) from tweets. We further analyzed the extracted VAE data 
based on the location, time, and frequency. We found that the four most populous 
states (California, Texas, Florida, and New York) in the US witnessed the most 
VAE discussions on Twitter. The frequency of Twitter discussions of VAE 
coincided with the progress of the COVID-19 vaccinations. Sore to touch, 
fatigue, and headache are the three most common adverse effects of all three 
COVID-19 vaccines in the US. Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of using 
social media data to monitor VAEs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first study to identify COVID-19 vaccine adverse event signals from social 
media. It can be an excellent supplement to the existing vaccine 
pharmacovigilance systems.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines10010103
PMCID: PMC8781534
PMID: 35062764

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


387. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2011 Sep-Oct;18(5):631-8. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2010-000022. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Text mining for the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System: medical text 
classification using informative feature selection.

Botsis T(1), Nguyen MD, Woo EJ, Markatou M, Ball R.

Author information:
(1)Office of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and 
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA. 
taxiarchis.botsis@fda.hhs.gov

OBJECTIVE: The US Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) collects 
spontaneous reports of adverse events following vaccination. Medical officers 
review the reports and often apply standardized case definitions, such as those 
developed by the Brighton Collaboration. Our objective was to demonstrate a 
multi-level text mining approach for automated text classification of VAERS 
reports that could potentially reduce human workload.
DESIGN: We selected 6034 VAERS reports for H1N1 vaccine that were classified by 
medical officers as potentially positive (N(pos)=237) or negative for 
anaphylaxis. We created a categorized corpus of text files that included the 
class label and the symptom text field of each report. A validation set of 1100 
labeled text files was also used. Text mining techniques were applied to extract 
three feature sets for important keywords, low- and high-level patterns. A 
rule-based classifier processed the high-level feature representation, while 
several machine learning classifiers were trained for the remaining two feature 
representations.
MEASUREMENTS: Classifiers' performance was evaluated by macro-averaging recall, 
precision, and F-measure, and Friedman's test; misclassification error rate 
analysis was also performed.
RESULTS: Rule-based classifier, boosted trees, and weighted support vector 
machines performed well in terms of macro-recall, however at the expense of a 
higher mean misclassification error rate. The rule-based classifier performed 
very well in terms of average sensitivity and specificity (79.05% and 94.80%, 
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Our validated results showed the possibility of developing effective 
medical text classifiers for VAERS reports by combining text mining with 
informative feature selection; this strategy has the potential to reduce 
reviewer workload considerably.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2010-000022
PMCID: PMC3168300
PMID: 21709163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


388. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2004;107(Pt 1):626-30.

A knowledge based approach for automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance.

Henegar C(1), Bousquet C, Lillo-Le Louët A, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Santé Publique et d'Informatique Médicale, INSERM ERM 202, 
Faculté de médecine Broussais Hôtel Dieu, 15 rue de l'Ecole de Médecine, 75006 
Paris, France. corneliu.henegar@spim.jussieu.fr

BACKGROUND: Pharmacovigilance experts detect new adverse drug reactions (ADR) by 
manually reviewing spontaneous reporting systems. Automated signal generation 
aims to focus the attention of experts on drug-adverse event associations which 
are disproportionally present in the database. Although adverse events are coded 
by means of controlled vocabularies such as the MedDRA dictionary, this semantic 
information is not taken into account for signal generation.
OBJECTIVE: To improve the performance of current signal detection algorithms 
using knowledge based approach.
METHOD: We developed a formal ontology of ADRs and built a data mining tool that 
uses description logic representations of MedDRA terms to group medically 
related case reports.
RESULTS: This knowledge based approach increased the sensitivity of signal 
detection with no decrease in specificity.
DISCUSSION: A knowledge based approach improved the performance of signal 
detection tools. However, the huge work-load involved in the knowledge 
engineering step limits the use of this approach for machine learning.

PMID: 15360888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. JMIR Form Res. 2022 Mar 30;6(3):e33919. doi: 10.2196/33919.

Using Named Entity Recognition to Identify Substances Used in the 
Self-medication of Opioid Withdrawal: Natural Language Processing Study of 
Reddit Data.

Preiss A(1), Baumgartner P(1)(2), Edlund MJ(3), Bobashev GV(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Data Science, RTI International, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)ExplosionAI GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Community Health Research Division, RTI International, Durham, NC, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: The cessation of opioid use can cause withdrawal symptoms. People 
often continue opioid misuse to avoid these symptoms. Many people who use 
opioids self-treat withdrawal symptoms with a range of substances. Little is 
known about the substances that people use or their effects.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to validate a methodology for identifying 
the substances used to treat symptoms of opioid withdrawal by a community of 
people who use opioids on the social media site Reddit.
METHODS: We developed a named entity recognition model to extract substances and 
effects from nearly 4 million comments from the r/opiates and r/OpiatesRecovery 
subreddits. To identify effects that are symptoms of opioid withdrawal and 
substances that are potential remedies for these symptoms, we deduplicated 
substances and effects by using clustering and manual review, then built a 
network of substance and effect co-occurrence. For each of the 16 effects 
identified as symptoms of opioid withdrawal in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, we identified the 10 most strongly 
associated substances. We classified these pairs as follows: substance is a Food 
and Drug Administration-approved or commonly used treatment for the symptom, 
substance is not often used to treat the symptom but could be potentially useful 
given its pharmacological profile, substance is a home or natural remedy for the 
symptom, substance can cause the symptom, or other or unclear. We developed the 
Withdrawal Remedy Explorer application to facilitate the further exploration of 
the data.
RESULTS: Our named entity recognition model achieved F1 scores of 92.1 
(substances) and 81.7 (effects) on hold-out data. We identified 458 unique 
substances and 235 unique effects. Of the 130 potential remedies strongly 
associated with withdrawal symptoms, 54 (41.5%) were Food and Drug 
Administration-approved or commonly used treatments for the symptom, 17 (13.1%) 
were not often used to treat the symptom but could be potentially useful given 
their pharmacological profile, 13 (10%) were natural or home remedies, 7 (5.4%) 
were causes of the symptom, and 39 (30%) were other or unclear. We identified 
both potentially promising remedies (eg, gabapentin for body aches) and 
potentially common but harmful remedies (eg, antihistamines for restless leg 
syndrome).
CONCLUSIONS: Many of the withdrawal remedies discussed by Reddit users are 
either clinically proven or potentially useful. These results suggest that this 
methodology is a valid way to study the self-treatment behavior of a web-based 
community of people who use opioids. Our Withdrawal Remedy Explorer application 
provides a platform for using these data for pharmacovigilance, the 
identification of new treatments, and the better understanding of the needs of 
people undergoing opioid withdrawal. Furthermore, this approach could be applied 
to many other disease states for which people self-manage their symptoms and 
discuss their experiences on the web.

©Alexander Preiss, Peter Baumgartner, Mark J Edlund, Georgiy V Bobashev. 
Originally published in JMIR Formative Research (https://formative.jmir.org), 
30.03.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/33919
PMCID: PMC9008522
PMID: 35353047

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


390. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1990 Dec 8;120(49):1849-52.

Semi-quantitative simulation for reasoning about physiological models of drug 
kinetics and effects.

Leemann TD(1), Blaschke TF.

Author information:
(1)Departement of Medicine, Stanford University, CA.

Inter- and intra-individual pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic variability is a 
major cause of adverse drug reactions or ineffective therapy. We are developing 
a computer-based tool for predicting the consequences of different physiological 
and pathological states and for reasoning about the possible causes of observed 
variability that may be useful both in a clinical decision support environment 
for drug monitoring and as a research aid in the investigation of the influence 
of physiological factors on drug response. It is based on a physiological 
approach to pharmacokinetic modeling in which actual anatomical or physiological 
entities, such as organs, tissues or blood flows, are represented. These models 
serve as the basis for semi-quantitative simulation, a method linking classical 
quantitative simulation (by numerical integration of differential equations) 
with artificial intelligence-based qualitative simulation techniques. This 
approach retains the mathematical power of the Systems Dynamics method for 
solving complex, time-varying systems containing feed-back loops, which are 
intractable for current qualitative knowledge representation techniques, and 
extends it with the causal reasoning and explanation power of symbolic inference 
techniques used in expert systems. It also allows problem solving in situations, 
so common in medicine, where initial values of variables and parameters cannot 
be estimated precisely. Simulation outputs are intended to be qualitatively, but 
not necessarily quantitatively, correct. The semi-quantitative simulation method 
was originally developed in MacLisp on a DEC 2060 and applied to modeling 
cardio-vascular physiology. We are porting the code to Common Lisp on a 
Macintosh and adapting the approach to pharmacology, concentrating on drug 
metabolism issues, with lidocaine pharmacokinetics as a test case.

PMID: 2263925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. JMIR Form Res. 2022 Apr 1;6(4):e35069. doi: 10.2196/35069.

A Smart Mobile App to Simplify Medical Documents and Improve Health Literacy: 
System Design and Feasibility Validation.

Hendawi R(1), Alian S(1), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, United States.

BACKGROUND: People with low health literacy experience more challenges in 
understanding instructions given by their health providers, following 
prescriptions, and understanding their health care system sufficiently to obtain 
the maximum benefits. People with insufficient health literacy have high risk of 
making medical mistakes, more chances of experiencing adverse drug effects, and 
inferior control of chronic diseases.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to design, develop, and evaluate a mobile health app, 
MediReader, to help individuals better understand complex medical materials and 
improve their health literacy.
METHODS: MediReader is designed and implemented through several steps, which are 
as follows: measure and understand an individual's health literacy level; 
identify medical terminologies that the individual may not understand based on 
their health literacy; annotate and interpret the identified medical 
terminologies tailored to the individual's reading skill levels, with meanings 
defined in the appropriate external knowledge sources; evaluate MediReader using 
task-based user study and satisfaction surveys.
RESULTS: On the basis of the comparison with a control group, user study results 
demonstrate that MediReader can improve users' understanding of medical 
documents. This improvement is particularly significant for users with low 
health literacy levels. The satisfaction survey showed that users are satisfied 
with the tool in general.
CONCLUSIONS: MediReader provides an easy-to-use interface for users to read and 
understand medical documents. It can effectively identify medical terms that a 
user may not understand, and then, annotate and interpret them with appropriate 
meanings using languages that the user can understand. Experimental results 
demonstrate the feasibility of using this tool to improve an individual's 
understanding of medical materials.

©Rasha Hendawi, Shadi Alian, Juan Li. Originally published in JMIR Formative 
Research (https://formative.jmir.org), 01.04.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/35069
PMCID: PMC9015750
PMID: 35363142

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


392. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Dec 28;18(1):155. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18010155.

A Machine Learning Approach to Identify Predictors of Potentially Inappropriate 
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Use in Older Adults with 
Osteoarthritis.

Patel J(1), Ladani A(2), Sambamoorthi N(3), LeMasters T(1), Dwibedi N(1), 
Sambamoorthi U(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Systems and Policy, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(2)Rheumatology, West Virginia University Medicine, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(3)Masters in Data Science Program, School of Professional Studies, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL 60201, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacotherapy, HSC College of Pharmacy, The University of 
North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

Evidence from some studies suggest that osteoarthritis (OA) patients are often 
prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that are not in 
accordance with their cardiovascular (CV) or gastrointestinal (GI) risk 
profiles. However, no such study has been carried out in the United States. 
Therefore, we sought to examine the prevalence and predictors of potentially 
inappropriate NSAIDs use in older adults (age > 65) with OA using machine 
learning with real-world data from Optum De-identified Clinformatics® Data Mart. 
We identified a retrospective cohort of eligible individuals using data from 
2015 (baseline) and 2016 (follow-up). Potentially inappropriate NSAIDs use was 
identified using the type (COX-2 selective vs. non-selective) and length of 
NSAIDs use and an individual's CV and GI risk. Predictors of potentially 
inappropriate NSAIDs use were identified using eXtreme Gradient Boosting. Our 
study cohort comprised of 44,990 individuals (mean age 75.9 years). We found 
that 12.8% individuals had potentially inappropriate NSAIDs use, but the rate 
was disproportionately higher (44.5%) in individuals at low CV/high GI risk. 
Longer duration of NSAIDs use during baseline (AOR 1.02; 95% CI:1.02-1.02 for 
both non-selective and selective NSAIDs) was associated with a higher risk of 
potentially inappropriate NSAIDs use. Additionally, individuals with low CV/high 
GI (AOR 1.34; 95% CI:1.20-1.50) and high CV/low GI risk (AOR 1.61; 95% 
CI:1.34-1.93) were also more likely to have potentially inappropriate NSAIDs 
use. Heightened surveillance of older adults with OA requiring NSAIDs is 
warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18010155
PMCID: PMC7794853
PMID: 33379288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


393. BMJ Open Gastroenterol. 2020 Nov;7(1):e000532. doi: 10.1136/bmjgast-2020-000532.

High incidence of glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycaemia in inflammatory bowel 
disease: metabolic and clinical predictors identified by machine learning.

McDonnell M(1)(2), Harris RJ(3), Borca F(4)(5), Mills T(3), Downey L(3), 
Dharmasiri S(3), Patel M(6), Zare B(3), Stammers M(3)(7), Smith TR(3), Felwick 
R(3), Cummings JRF(3)(2), Phan HTT(4)(5), Gwiggner M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK m.j.mcdonnell@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Human Health and Development, University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine, 
Southampton, UK.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(4)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospital Southampton 
NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(5)Clinical Informatics Research Unit, University of Southampton Faculty of 
Medicine, Southampton, UK.
(6)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(7)NIHR Biomedical Research Facility, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticosteroids (GC) are long-established, widely used agents 
for induction of remission in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Hyperglycaemia 
is a known complication of GC treatment with implications for morbidity and 
mortality. Published data on prevalence and risk factors for GC-induced 
hyperglycaemia in the IBD population are limited. We prospectively characterise 
this complication in our cohort, employing machine-learning methods to identify 
key predictors of risk.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective observational study of IBD patients 
receiving intravenous hydrocortisone (IVH). Electronically triggered three times 
daily capillary blood glucose (CBG) monitoring was recorded alongside diabetes 
mellitus (DM) history, IBD biomarkers, nutritional and IBD clinical activity 
scores. Hyperglycaemia was defined as CBG ≥11.1 mmol/L and undiagnosed DM as 
glycated haemoglobin ≥48 mmol/mol. Random forest (RF) regression models were 
used to extract predictor-patterns present within the dataset.
RESULTS: 94 consecutive IBD patients treated with IVH were included. 60% (56/94) 
of the cohort recorded an episode of hyperglycaemia, including 57% (50/88) of 
those with no history of DM, of which 19% (17/88) and 5% (4/88) recorded a CBG 
≥14 mmol/L and ≥20 mmol/L, respectively. The RF models identified increased 
C-reactive protein (CRP) followed by a longer IBD duration as leading risk 
predictors for significant hyperglycaemia.
CONCLUSION: Hyperglycaemia is common in IBD patients treated with intravenous 
GC. Therefore, CBG monitoring should be included in routine clinical practice. 
Machine learning methods can identify key risk factors for clinical 
complications. Steroid-sparing treatment strategies may be considered for those 
IBD patients with higher admission CRP and greater disease duration, who appear 
to be at the greatest risk of hyperglycaemia.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgast-2020-000532
PMCID: PMC7668301
PMID: 33187976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MM: received non-financial 
support from Falk, MSD, Janssen and Takeda. RJH: personal fees from AbbVie and 
Janssen; non-financial support from Falk. LD: non-financial support from 
Janssen. SD: personal fees and non-financial support from Janssen; personal fees 
from Falk, MSD and AbbVie. JRFC: personal fees and research and/or educational 
support from Abbot, AbbVie, Amgen, Astra Zeneca, Biogen, Celltrion, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Norgine, Pfizer, Pharmacosmos, Samsung, Shield 
Therapeutics, Shire, Takeda and Vifor. MG: personal fees from AbbVie, MSD and 
Takeda; non-financial support from AbbVie and Takeda.


394. Interact J Med Res. 2016 May 16;5(2):e14. doi: 10.2196/ijmr.5462.

An Observational Study to Evaluate the Usability and Intent to Adopt an 
Artificial Intelligence-Powered Medication Reconciliation Tool.

Long J(1), Yuan MJ, Poonawala R.

Author information:
(1)McCoy College of Business Administration, Department of Computer Information 
Systems and Quantitative Methods, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, United 
States. jl38@txstate.edu.

BACKGROUND: Medication reconciliation (the process of creating an accurate list 
of all medications a patient is taking) is a widely practiced procedure to 
reduce medication errors. It is mandated by the Joint Commission and reimbursed 
by Medicare. Yet, in practice, medication reconciliation is often not effective 
owing to knowledge gaps in the team. A promising approach to improve medication 
reconciliation is to incorporate artificial intelligence (AI) decision support 
tools into the process to engage patients and bridge the knowledge gap.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to improve the accuracy and efficiency of 
medication reconciliation by engaging the patient, the nurse, and the physician 
as a team via an iPad tool. With assistance from the AI agent, the patient will 
review his or her own medication list from the electronic medical record (EMR) 
and annotate changes, before reviewing together with the physician and making 
decisions on the shared iPad screen.
METHODS: In this study, we developed iPad-based software tools, with AI decision 
support, to engage patients to "self-service" medication reconciliation and then 
share the annotated reconciled list with the physician. To evaluate the software 
tool's user interface and workflow, a small number of patients (10) in a primary 
care clinic were recruited, and they were observed through the whole process 
during a pilot study. The patients are surveyed for the tool's usability 
afterward.
RESULTS: All patients were able to complete the medication reconciliation 
process correctly. Every patient found at least one error or other issues with 
their EMR medication lists. All of them reported that the tool was easy to use, 
and 8 of 10 patients reported that they will use the tool in the future. 
However, few patients interacted with the learning modules in the tool. The 
physician and nurses reported the tool to be easy-to-use, easy to integrate into 
existing workflow, and potentially time-saving.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a promising tool for a new approach to medication 
reconciliation. It has the potential to create more accurate medication lists 
faster, while better informing the patients about their medications and reducing 
burden on clinicians.

DOI: 10.2196/ijmr.5462
PMCID: PMC4904823
PMID: 27185210

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Michael Yuan is the CEO 
of Ringful Health, which creates the software tool and could benefit from its 
commercial use.


395. Int J Med Inform. 2020 Mar;135:104054. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.104054. Epub 
2019 Dec 12.

Toward systems-centered analysis of patient safety events: Improving root cause 
analysis by optimized incident classification and information presentation.

Liang C(1), Zhou S(2), Yao B(2), Hood D(3), Gong Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Services Policy and Management, Arnold School of Public 
Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States.
(2)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Division of Nursing, Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA, United States.
(4)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
Houston, TX, United States. Electronic address: yang.gong@uth.tmc.edu.

Erratum in
    Int J Med Inform. 2020 May;137:104103.

BACKGROUND: Systems-centered root cause analysis (RCA) of patient safety events 
presents unique advantages as it aims to disclose vulnerabilities of healthcare 
systems. However, the increasing number of collected events poses the problems 
of low efficiency and information overload for traditional RCA.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to improve systems-centered RCA by developing 
optimized information extraction and presentation.
METHODS: We experimented supervised machine-learning methods to extract 
safety-related information from 3333 de-identified patient safety event reports 
from two independent sources. Based on the extracted information, we further 
evaluated how optimized information presentation could help facilitate the 
disclosure of system vulnerabilities in traditional RCA.
RESULTS: Multilabel text classification is effective in identifying 
safety-related information from the narrative description of patient safety 
events. The Pruned Sets in conjunction with Naïve Bayes are the outperformed 
algorithm in one dataset, with an overall F score of 60.0 % and the highest F 
score of 96.0 % for identifying "Adverse Drug Reaction". The Classifier Chains 
in conjunction with Naïve Bayes are the outperformed algorithm in another 
dataset, with an overall F score of 43.2 % and the highest F score of 64.0 % for 
identifying "Medication". During the RCA, human experts applied the optimized 
presentation of information which showed advantages of identifying system 
vulnerabilities.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated the feasibility of using multilabel text 
classification for identifying safety-related information from the narrative 
description of patient safety events. The extracted information when grouped by 
safety-related information can better aid human experts to conduct 
systems-centered RCA and disclose system vulnerabilities.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.104054
PMID: 31864129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Appl Intell (Dordr). 2022;52(11):13114-13131. doi: 10.1007/s10489-022-03222-y. 
Epub 2022 Feb 22.

Bi-level artificial intelligence model for risk classification of acute 
respiratory diseases based on Chinese clinical data.

Leng J(1)(2), Wang D(1), Ma X(1), Yu P(3), Wei L(3), Chen W(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Precision Electronic Manufacturing Technology and 
Equipment, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006 Guangdong 
China.
(2)Department of Information Systems, Chengdu Research Institute, City 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, 510120 China.

OBJECTIVE: The high incidence of respiratory diseases has dramatically increased 
the medical burden under the COVID-19 pandemic in the year 2020. It is of 
considerable significance to utilize a new generation of information technology 
to improve the artificial intelligence level of respiratory disease diagnosis.
METHODS: Based on the semi-structured data of Chinese Electronic Medical Records 
(CEMRs) from the China Hospital Pharmacovigilance System, this paper proposed a 
bi-level artificial intelligence model for the risk classification of acute 
respiratory diseases. It includes two levels. The first level is a dedicated 
design of the "BiLSTM+Dilated Convolution+3D Attention+CRF" deep learning model 
that is used for Chinese Clinical Named Entity Recognition (CCNER) to extract 
valuable information from the unstructured data in the CEMRs. Incorporating the 
transfer learning and semi-supervised learning technique into the proposed deep 
learning model achieves higher accuracy and efficiency in the CCNER task than 
the popular "Bert+BiLSTM+CRF" approach. Combining the extracted entity data with 
other structured data in the CEMRs, the second level is a customized XGBoost to 
realize the risk classification of acute respiratory diseases.
RESULTS: The empirical study shows that the proposed model could provide 
practical technical support for improving diagnostic accuracy.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides a proof-of-concept for implementing a hybrid 
artificial intelligence-based system as a tool to aid clinicians in tackling 
CEMR data and enhancing the diagnostic evaluation under diagnostic uncertainty.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s10489-022-03222-y
PMCID: PMC8861621
PMID: 35221528


397. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Oct;131(4):282-293. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13773. 
Epub 2022 Jul 26.

Language-agnostic pharmacovigilant text mining to elicit side effects from 
clinical notes and hospital medication records.

Kaas-Hansen BS(1)(2)(3), Placido D(2), Rodríguez CL(2), Thorsen-Meyer HC(4), 
Gentile S(5), Nielsen AP(2), Brunak S(2), Jürgens G(1), Andersen SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Section of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital 
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Radiology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.

We sought to craft a drug safety signalling pipeline associating latent 
information in clinical free text with exposures to single drugs and drug pairs. 
Data arose from 12 secondary and tertiary public hospitals in two Danish 
regions, comprising approximately half the Danish population. Notes were 
operationalised with a fastText embedding, based on which we trained 10 270 
neural-network models (one for each distinct single-drug/drug-pair exposure) 
predicting the risk of exposure given an embedding vector. We included 2 905 251 
admissions between May 2008 and June 2016, with 13 740 564 distinct drug 
prescriptions; the median number of prescriptions was 5 (IQR: 3-9) and in 
1 184 340 (41%) admissions patients used ≥5 drugs concomitantly. A total of 
10 788 259 clinical notes were included, with 179 441 739 tokens retained after 
pruning. Of 345 single-drug signals reviewed, 28 (8.1%) represented possibly 
undescribed relationships; 186 (54%) signals were clinically meaningful. Sixteen 
(14%) of the 115 drug-pair signals were possible interactions, and two (1.7%) 
were known. In conclusion, we built a language-agnostic pipeline for mining 
associations between free-text information and medication exposure without 
manual curation, predicting not the likely outcome of a range of exposures but 
also the likely exposures for outcomes of interest. Our approach may help 
overcome limitations of text mining methods relying on curated data in English 
and can help leverage non-English free text for pharmacovigilance.

© 2022 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT 
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13773
PMCID: PMC9541191
PMID: 35834334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SB reports ownerships in Intomics A/S, Hoba 
Therapeutics Aps, Novo Nordisk A/S, Lundbeck A/S, and managing board memberships 
in Proscion A/S and Intomics A/S outside the submitted work. All other authors 
report no competing interests.


398. Comput Biol Med. 2006 Jul-Aug;36(7-8):748-67. doi: 
10.1016/j.compbiomed.2005.04.009. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Building an ontology of adverse drug reactions for automated signal generation 
in pharmacovigilance.

Henegar C(1), Bousquet C, Lillo-Le Louët A, Degoulet P, Jaulent MC.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U729, F-75006 Paris, France.

Automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance implements unsupervised 
statistical machine learning techniques in order to discover unknown adverse 
drug reactions (ADR) in spontaneous reporting systems. The impact of the 
terminology used for coding ADRs has not been addressed previously. The Medical 
Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) used worldwide in 
pharmacovigilance cases does not provide formal definitions of terms. We have 
built an ontology of ADRs to describe semantics of MedDRA terms. Ontological 
subsumption and approximate matching inferences allow a better grouping of 
medically related conditions. Signal generation performances are significantly 
improved but time consumption related to modelization remains very important.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2005.04.009
PMID: 16185681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. IEEE Trans Nanobioscience. 2013 Sep;12(3):206-13. doi: 10.1109/TNB.2013.2263511. 
Epub 2013 May 16.

Predicting drug-induced QT prolongation effects using multi-view learning.

Zhang J(1), Huan J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA. 
jtzhang@ku.edu

Drug-induced QT prolongation is a major life-threatening adverse drug effect. It 
is crucial to predict the QT prolongation effect as early as possible in drug 
development, however, data on drugs that induce QT prolongation are very limited 
and noisy. Multi-view learning (MVL) has been applied to many challenging 
machine learning and data mining problems, especially when complex data from 
diverse domains are involved and only limited labeled examples are available. 
Unlike existing MVL methods that use l2-norm co-regularization to obtain a 
smooth objective function, in this paper we proposed an l1-norm co-regularized 
MVL algorithm for predicting drug-induced QT prolongation effect and reformulate 
the l1-norm co-regularized objective function for deriving its gradient in the 
analytic form, and we can optimize the mapping functions on all views 
simultaneously and achieve 3-4 times higher computational efficiency, while 
previous l2-norm co-regularized MVL methods use alternate optimization that 
alternately optimizes one view with the other views fixed until convergence. l1 
-norm co-regularization enforces sparsity in the learned mapping functions and 
hence the results are expected to be more interpretable. Comprehensive 
experimental comparisons between our proposed method and previous MVL and 
single-view learning methods demonstrate that our method significantly 
outperforms those baseline methods more efficiently.

DOI: 10.1109/TNB.2013.2263511
PMID: 23694701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Med Internet Res. 2019 Aug 7;21(8):e13003. doi: 10.2196/13003.

Social Media Surveillance of Multiple Sclerosis Medications Used During 
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding: Content Analysis.

Rezaallah B(1)(2), Lewis DJ(2)(3), Pierce C(4), Zeilhofer HF(5)(6), Berg 
BI(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Research, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Patient Safety, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)School of Health and Human Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Booz Allen Hamilton Inc, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Hightech Research Center of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    J Med Internet Res. 2020 Feb 19;22(2):e18294.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic neurological disease occurring 
mostly in women of childbearing age. Pregnant women with MS are usually excluded 
from clinical trials; as users of the internet, however, they are actively 
engaged in threads and forums on social media. Social media provides the 
potential to explore real-world patient experiences and concerns about the use 
of medicinal products during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to analyze the content of posts concerning pregnancy 
and use of medicines in online forums; thus, the study aimed to gain a thorough 
understanding of patients' experiences with MS medication.
METHODS: Using the names of medicinal products as search terms, we collected 
posts from 21 publicly available pregnancy forums, which were accessed between 
March 2015 and March 2018. After the identification of relevant posts, we 
analyzed the content of each post using a content analysis technique and 
categorized the main topics that users discussed most frequently.
RESULTS: We identified 6 main topics in 70 social media posts. These topics were 
as follows: (1) expressing personal experiences with MS medication use during 
the reproductive period (55/70, 80%), (2) seeking and sharing advice about the 
use of medicines (52/70, 74%), (3) progression of MS during and after pregnancy 
(35/70, 50%), (4) discussing concerns about MS medications during the 
reproductive period (35/70, 50%), (5) querying the possibility of breastfeeding 
while taking MS medications (30/70, 42%), and (6) commenting on communications 
with physicians (26/70, 37%).
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, many pregnant women or women considering pregnancy shared 
profound uncertainties and specific concerns about taking medicines during the 
reproductive period. There is a significant need to provide advice and guidance 
to MS patients concerning the use of medicines in pregnancy and postpartum as 
well as during breastfeeding. Advice must be tailored to the circumstances of 
each patient and, of course, to the individual medicine. Information must be 
provided by a trusted source with relevant expertise and made publicly 
available.

©Bita Rezaallah, David John Lewis, Carrie Pierce, Hans-Florian Zeilhofer, 
Britt-Isabelle Berg. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (http://www.jmir.org), 07.08.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/13003
PMCID: PMC6702799
PMID: 31392963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: BR is an employee of 
Novartis. DL is an employee of Novartis and holds shares in Novartis and 
GlaxoSmithKline. CP was an employee of Booz Allen Hamilton when this research 
was conducted. BIB and H-FZ have no conflicts of interest.


401. Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). 2017 Nov;2017:1154-1159. doi: 
10.1109/BIBM.2017.8217820. Epub 2017 Dec 18.

Deep Gramulator: Improving Precision in the Classification of Personal 
Health-Experience Tweets with Deep Learning.

Calix RA(1), Gupta R(2), Gupta M(1), Jiang K(2).

Author information:
(1)Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, USA.
(2)Purdue University Northwest Hammond, USA.

Health surveillance is an important task to track the happenings related to 
human health, and one of its areas is pharmacovigilance. Pharmacovigilance 
tracks and monitors safe use of pharmaceutical products. Pharmacovigilance 
involves tracking side effects that may be caused by medicines and other health 
related drugs. Medical professionals have a difficult time collecting this 
information. It is anticipated that social media could help to collect this data 
and track side effects. Twitter data can be used for this task given that users 
post their personal health related experiences on-line. One problem with Twitter 
data, however, is that it contains a lot of noise. Therefore, an approach is 
needed to remove the noise. In this paper, several machine learning algorithms 
including deep neural nets are used to build classifiers that can help to detect 
these Personal Experience Tweets (PETs). Finally, we propose a method called the 
Deep Gramulator that improves results. Results of the analysis are presented and 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1109/BIBM.2017.8217820
PMCID: PMC6029703
PMID: 29977659


402. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2022 Aug 12. doi: 10.1002/pds.5524. Online ahead of 
print.

Artificial intelligence in pharmacovigilance: A regulatory perspective on 
explainability.

Pinheiro LC(1), Kurz X(1).

Author information:
(1)European Medicines Agency, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.5524
PMID: 35959980


403. J Biomed Inform. 2022 Oct 26:104228. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104228. Online 
ahead of print.

How do others cope? Extracting coping strategies for adverse drug events from 
social media.

Dirkson A(1), Verberne S(2), van Oortmerssen G(3), Gelderblom H(4), Kraaij W(5).

Author information:
(1)Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Niels 
Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
a.r.dirkson@liacs.leidenuniv.nl.
(2)Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Niels 
Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.verberne@liacs.leidenuniv.nl.
(3)Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Niels 
Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
g.van.oortmerssen@liacs.leidenuniv.nl.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
A.J.Gelderblom@lumc.nl.
(5)Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Niels 
Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
w.kraaij@liacs.leidenuniv.nl.

Patients advise their peers on how to cope with their illness in daily life on 
online support groups. To date, no efforts have been made to automatically 
extract recommended coping strategies from online patient discussion groups. We 
introduce this new task, which poses a number of challenges including complex, 
long entities, a large long-tailed label space, and cross-document relations. We 
present an initial ontology for coping strategies as a starting point for future 
research on coping strategies, and the first end-to-end pipeline for extracting 
coping strategies for side effects. We also compared two possible computational 
solutions for this novel and highly challenging task; multi-label classification 
and named entity recognition (NER) with entity linking (EL). We evaluated our 
methods on the discussion forum from the Facebook group of the worldwide patient 
support organization 'GIST support international' (GSI); GIST support 
international donated the data to us. We found that coping strategy extraction 
is difficult and both methods attain limited performance (measured with F1 
score) on held out test sets; multi-label classification outperforms NER+EL 
(F1=0.220 vs F1=0.155). An inspection of the multi-label classification output 
revealed that for some of the incorrect predictions, the reference label is 
close to the predicted label in the ontology (e.g. the predicted label 'juice' 
instead of the more specific reference label 'grapefruit juice'). Performance 
increased to F1=0.498 when we evaluated at a coarser level of the ontology. We 
conclude that our pipeline can be used in a semi-automatic setting, in 
interaction with domain experts to discover coping strategies for side effects 
from a patient forum. For example, we found that patients recommend ginger tea 
for nausea and magnesium and potassium supplements for cramps.This information 
can be used as input for patient surveys or clinical studies.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104228
PMID: 36309197

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


404. Proc Conf. 2016 Jun;2016:473-482. doi: 10.18653/v1/n16-1056.

Bidirectional RNN for Medical Event Detection in Electronic Health Records.

Jagannatha AN(1), Yu H(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts, MA, USA.
(2)University of Massachusetts, MA, USA; Bedford VAMC and CHOIR, MA, USA.

Sequence labeling for extraction of medical events and their attributes from 
unstructured text in Electronic Health Record (EHR) notes is a key step towards 
semantic understanding of EHRs. It has important applications in health 
informatics including pharmacovigilance and drug surveillance. The state of the 
art supervised machine learning models in this domain are based on Conditional 
Random Fields (CRFs) with features calculated from fixed context windows. In 
this application, we explored recurrent neural network frameworks and show that 
they significantly out-performed the CRF models.

DOI: 10.18653/v1/n16-1056
PMCID: PMC5119627
PMID: 27885364


405. JMIR Med Inform. 2019 Feb 8;7(1):e10788. doi: 10.2196/10788.

Detection of Bleeding Events in Electronic Health Record Notes Using 
Convolutional Neural Network Models Enhanced With Recurrent Neural Network 
Autoencoders: Deep Learning Approach.

Li R(1), Hu B(2), Liu F(3), Liu W(2), Cunningham F(4), McManus DD(3)(5), Yu 
H(1)(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Information and Computer Science, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, 
MA, United States.
(3)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs, Center for Medication Safety, Hines, IL, 
United States.
(5)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.
(6)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Bedford 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, MA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Bleeding events are common and critical and may cause significant 
morbidity and mortality. High incidences of bleeding events are associated with 
cardiovascular disease in patients on anticoagulant therapy. Prompt and accurate 
detection of bleeding events is essential to prevent serious consequences. As 
bleeding events are often described in clinical notes, automatic detection of 
bleeding events from electronic health record (EHR) notes may improve 
drug-safety surveillance and pharmacovigilance.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop a natural language processing (NLP) system to 
automatically classify whether an EHR note sentence contains a bleeding event.
METHODS: We expert annotated 878 EHR notes (76,577 sentences and 562,630 
word-tokens) to identify bleeding events at the sentence level. This annotated 
corpus was used to train and validate our NLP systems. We developed an 
innovative hybrid convolutional neural network (CNN) and long short-term memory 
(LSTM) autoencoder (HCLA) model that integrates a CNN architecture with a 
bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) autoencoder model to leverage large unlabeled EHR 
data.
RESULTS: HCLA achieved the best area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve (0.957) and F1 score (0.938) to identify whether a sentence contains a 
bleeding event, thereby surpassing the strong baseline support vector machines 
and other CNN and autoencoder models.
CONCLUSIONS: By incorporating a supervised CNN model and a pretrained 
unsupervised BiLSTM autoencoder, the HCLA achieved high performance in detecting 
bleeding events.

©Rumeng Li, Baotian Hu, Feifan Liu, Weisong Liu, Francesca Cunningham, David D 
McManus, Hong Yu. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(http://medinform.jmir.org), 08.02.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/10788
PMCID: PMC6384542
PMID: 30735140

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


406. Drug Saf. 2020 Mar;43(3):295-296. doi: 10.1007/s40264-019-00894-3.

Follow-Up on the Use of Machine Learning in Clinical Quality Assurance: Can We 
Detect Adverse Event Under-Reporting in Oncology Trials?

Ménard T(1), Koneswarakantha B(2), Rolo D(3), Barmaz Y(2), Popko L(2), Bowling 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland. timothe.menard@roche.com.
(2)F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Roche Products Limited, Welwyn Garden City, UK.
(4)Genentech - A Member of the Roche group, South San Francisco, USA.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-019-00894-3
PMCID: PMC7048863
PMID: 31834590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Timothé Ménard, Björn Koneswarakantha, Donato 
Rolo, Yves Barmaz, Rich Bowling, and Leszek Popko were employed by 
Roche/Genentech at the time this research was completed.


407. Drug Saf. 2022 Aug;45(8):927. doi: 10.1007/s40264-022-01199-8.

Correction to: Machine Learning in Causal Inference: Application in 
Pharmacovigilance.

Zhao Y(1), Yu Y(2), Wang H(1), Li Y(1), Deng Y(1), Jiang G(2), Luo Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, Room 11-189, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(2)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, 55902, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, 750 N Lake Shore Drive, Room 11-189, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. 
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu.

Erratum for
    Drug Saf. 2022 May;45(5):459-476.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-022-01199-8
PMCID: PMC9360080
PMID: 35737294


408. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Apr 21;12:112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-112.

BICEPP: an example-based statistical text mining method for predicting the 
binary characteristics of drugs.

Lin FP(1), Anthony S, Polasek TM, Tsafnat G, Doogue MP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Health Informatics, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia. f.lin@unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The identification of drug characteristics is a clinically important 
task, but it requires much expert knowledge and consumes substantial resources. 
We have developed a statistical text-mining approach (BInary Characteristics 
Extractor and biomedical Properties Predictor: BICEPP) to help experts screen 
drugs that may have important clinical characteristics of interest.
RESULTS: BICEPP first retrieves MEDLINE abstracts containing drug names, then 
selects tokens that best predict the list of drugs which represents the 
characteristic of interest. Machine learning is then used to classify drugs 
using a document frequency-based measure. Evaluation experiments were performed 
to validate BICEPP's performance on 484 characteristics of 857 drugs, identified 
from the Australian Medicines Handbook (AMH) and the PharmacoKinetic Interaction 
Screening (PKIS) database. Stratified cross-validations revealed that BICEPP was 
able to classify drugs into all 20 major therapeutic classes (100%) and 157 (of 
197) minor drug classes (80%) with areas under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) > 0.80. Similarly, AUC > 0.80 could be obtained in 
the classification of 173 (of 238) adverse events (73%), up to 12 (of 15) groups 
of clinically significant cytochrome P450 enzyme (CYP) inducers or inhibitors 
(80%), and up to 11 (of 14) groups of narrow therapeutic index drugs (79%). 
Interestingly, it was observed that the keywords used to describe a drug 
characteristic were not necessarily the most predictive ones for the 
classification task.
CONCLUSIONS: BICEPP has sufficient classification power to automatically 
distinguish a wide range of clinical properties of drugs. This may be used in 
pharmacovigilance applications to assist with rapid screening of large drug 
databases to identify important characteristics for further evaluation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-112
PMCID: PMC3110144
PMID: 21510898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;169(10):1065-72. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11091325.

Antidepressant response in patients with major depression exposed to NSAIDs: a 
pharmacovigilance study.

Gallagher PJ(1), Castro V, Fava M, Weilburg JB, Murphy SN, Gainer VS, Churchill 
SE, Kohane IS, Iosifescu DV, Smoller JW, Perlis RH.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;169(10):1012-5.

OBJECTIVE It has been suggested that there is a mechanism by which nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may interfere with antidepressant response, and 
poorer outcomes among NSAID-treated patients were reported in the Sequenced 
Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) study. To attempt to 
confirm this association in an independent population-based treatment cohort and 
explore potential confounding variables, the authors examined use of NSAIDs and 
related medications among 1,528 outpatients in a New England health care system. 
METHOD Treatment outcomes were classified using a validated machine learning 
tool applied to electronic medical records. Logistic regression was used to 
examine the association between medication exposure and treatment outcomes, 
adjusted for potential confounding variables. To further elucidate confounding 
and treatment specificity of the observed effects, data from the STAR*D study 
were reanalyzed. RESULTS NSAID exposure was associated with a greater likelihood 
of depression classified as treatment resistant compared with depression 
classified as responsive to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (odds 
ratio=1.55, 95% CI=1.21-2.00). This association was apparent in the NSAIDs-only 
group but not in those using other agents with NSAID-like mechanisms 
(cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and salicylates). Inclusion of age, sex, ethnicity, 
and measures of comorbidity and health care utilization in regression models 
indicated confounding; association with outcome was no longer significant in 
fully adjusted models. Reanalysis of STAR*D results likewise identified an 
association in NSAIDs but not NSAID-like drugs, with more modest effects 
persisting after adjustment for potential confounding variables. CONCLUSIONS 
These results support an association between NSAID use and poorer antidepressant 
outcomes in major depressive disorder but indicate that some of the observed 
effect may be a result of confounding.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11091325
PMCID: PMC3787520
PMID: 23032386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Oct 13;13:1011492. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1011492. eCollection 2022.

Integrating machine learning with electronic health record data to facilitate 
detection of prolactin level and pharmacovigilance signals in olanzapine-treated 
patients.

Zhu X(1)(2), Hu J(1)(2), Xiao T(1)(3), Huang S(1)(2), Shang D(1)(2), Wen 
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Brain Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Engineering Technology Research Center for Translational Medicine 
of Mental Disorders, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Research, Guangdong Second Provincial General 
Hospital, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Available evidence suggests elevated serum prolactin (PRL) 
levels in olanzapine (OLZ)-treated patients with schizophrenia. However, machine 
learning (ML)-based comprehensive evaluations of the influence of 
pathophysiological and pharmacological factors on PRL levels in OLZ-treated 
patients are rare. We aimed to forecast the PRL level in OLZ-treated patients 
and mine pharmacovigilance information on PRL-related adverse events by 
integrating ML and electronic health record (EHR) data.
METHODS: Data were extracted from an EHR system to construct an ML dataset in 
672×384 matrix format after preprocessing, which was subsequently randomly 
divided into a derivation cohort for model development and a validation cohort 
for model validation (8:2). The eXtreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) algorithm 
was used to build the ML models, the importance of the features and predictive 
behaviors of which were illustrated by SHapley Additive exPlanations 
(SHAP)-based analyses. The sequential forward feature selection approach was 
used to generate the optimal feature subset. The co-administered drugs that 
might have influenced PRL levels during OLZ treatment as identified by SHAP 
analyses were then compared with evidence from disproportionality analyses by 
using OpenVigil FDA.
RESULTS: The 15 features that made the greatest contributions, as ranked by the 
mean (|SHAP value|), were identified as the optimal feature subset. The features 
were gender_male, co-administration of risperidone, age, co-administration of 
aripiprazole, concentration of aripiprazole, concentration of OLZ, progesterone, 
co-administration of sulpiride, creatine kinase, serum sodium, serum phosphorus, 
testosterone, platelet distribution width, α-L-fucosidase, and lipoprotein (a). 
The XGBoost model after feature selection delivered good performance on the 
validation cohort with a mean absolute error of 0.046, mean squared error of 
0.0036, root-mean-squared error of 0.060, and mean relative error of 11%. 
Risperidone and aripiprazole exhibited the strongest associations with 
hyperprolactinemia and decreased blood PRL according to the disproportionality 
analyses, and both were identified as co-administered drugs that influenced PRL 
levels during OLZ treatment by SHAP analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple pathophysiological and pharmacological confounders 
influence PRL levels associated with effective treatment and PRL-related 
side-effects in OLZ-treated patients. Our study highlights the feasibility of 
integration of ML and EHR data to facilitate the detection of PRL levels and 
pharmacovigilance signals in OLZ-treated patients.

Copyright © 2022 Zhu, Hu, Xiao, Huang, Shang and Wen.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1011492
PMCID: PMC9606398
PMID: 36313772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


411. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2022 May 24;8(5):e30426. doi: 10.2196/30426.

Identifying Cases of Shoulder Injury Related to Vaccine Administration (SIRVA) 
in the United States: Development and Validation of a Natural Language 
Processing Method.

Zheng C(1), Duffy J(2), Liu IA(1), Sy LS(1), Navarro RA(3), Kim SS(1), Ryan 
DS(1), Chen W(1), Qian L(1), Mercado C(1), Jacobsen SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
Pasadena, CA, United States.
(2)Immunization Safety Office, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA, United States.
(3)Kaiser Permanente South Bay Medical Center, Harbor City, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Shoulder injury related to vaccine administration (SIRVA) accounts 
for more than half of all claims received by the National Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program. However, due to the difficulty of finding SIRVA cases in 
large health care databases, population-based studies are scarce.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of the research was to develop a natural language processing 
(NLP) method to identify SIRVA cases from clinical notes.
METHODS: We conducted the study among members of a large integrated health care 
organization who were vaccinated between April 1, 2016, and December 31, 2017, 
and had subsequent diagnosis codes indicative of shoulder injury. Based on a 
training data set with a chart review reference standard of 164 cases, we 
developed an NLP algorithm to extract shoulder disorder information, including 
prior vaccination, anatomic location, temporality and causality. The algorithm 
identified 3 groups of positive SIRVA cases (definite, probable, and possible) 
based on the strength of evidence. We compared NLP results to a chart review 
reference standard of 100 vaccinated cases. We then applied the final automated 
NLP algorithm to a broader cohort of vaccinated persons with a shoulder injury 
diagnosis code and performed manual chart confirmation on a random sample of 
NLP-identified definite cases and all NLP-identified probable and possible 
cases.
RESULTS: In the validation sample, the NLP algorithm had 100% accuracy for 
identifying 4 SIRVA cases and 96 cases without SIRVA. In the broader cohort of 
53,585 vaccinations, the NLP algorithm identified 291 definite, 124 probable, 
and 52 possible SIRVA cases. The chart-confirmation rates for these groups were 
95.5% (278/291), 67.7% (84/124), and 17.3% (9/52), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The algorithm performed with high sensitivity and reasonable 
specificity in identifying positive SIRVA cases. The NLP algorithm can 
potentially be used in future population-based studies to identify this rare 
adverse event, avoiding labor-intensive chart review validation.

©Chengyi Zheng, Jonathan Duffy, In-Lu Amy Liu, Lina S Sy, Ronald A Navarro, 
Sunhea S Kim, Denison S Ryan, Wansu Chen, Lei Qian, Cheryl Mercado, Steven J 
Jacobsen. Originally published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance 
(https://publichealth.jmir.org), 24.05.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/30426
PMCID: PMC9175103
PMID: 35608886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: LSS has received research 
support from GlaxoSmithKline, Dynavax, Seqirus, and Moderna for studies 
unrelated to this paper. LQ has received research support from GlaxoSmithKline, 
Moderna, and Dynavax for studies unrelated to this paper. All other authors 
report no conflicts of interest related to the submitted work.


412. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Apr;107(4):944-947. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1789. Epub 2020 
Feb 27.

An Application of Machine Learning in Pharmacovigilance: Estimating Likely 
Patient Genotype From Phenotypical Manifestations of Fluoropyrimidine Toxicity.

Correia Pinheiro L(1), Durand J(1), Dogné JM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)European Medicines Agency, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(3)Belgian Federal Agency for Medicines and Health Products, Brussels, Belgium.

Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD)-deficient patients might only become aware 
of their genotype after exposure to dihydropyrimidines, if testing is performed. 
Case reports to pharmacovigilance databases might only contain phenotypical 
manifestations of DPD, without information on the genotype. This poses a 
difficulty in estimating the cases due to DPD. Auto machine learning models were 
developed to train patterns of phenotypical manifestations of toxicity, which 
were then used as a surrogate to estimate the number of cases of DPD-related 
toxicity. Results indicate that between 8,878 (7.0%) and 16,549 (13.1%) patients 
have a profile similar to DPD deficient status. Results of the analysis of 
variable importance match the known end-organ damage of DPD-related toxicity, 
however, accuracies in the range of 90% suggest presence of overfitting, thus, 
results need to be interpreted carefully. This study shows the potential for use 
of machine learning in the regulatory context but additional studies are 
required to better understand regulatory applicability.

© 2020 European Medicines Agency. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published 
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1789
PMCID: PMC7158217
PMID: 31955411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.


413. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2022 Jun 6;290:767-771. doi: 10.3233/SHTI220182.

Extraction of Medication-Effect Relations in Twitter Data with Neural Embedding 
and Recurrent Neural Network.

Jiang K(1), Zhang D(2), Bernard GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Information Technology & Graphics, Purdue University 
Northwest, Hammond, Indiana, U.S.A.
(2)School of Information and Intelligent Engineering, Ningbo City College of 
Vocational Technology, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, U.S.A.

Recently, an active area of research in pharmacovigilance is to use social media 
such as Twitter as an alternative data source to gather patient-generated 
information pertaining to medication use. Most of thr published work focuses on 
identifying mentions of adverse effects in social media data but rarely 
investigating the relationship between a mentioned medication and any mentioned 
effect expressions. In this study, we treated this relation extraction task as a 
classification problem, and represented the Twitter text with neural embedding 
which was fed to a recurrent neural network classifier. The classification 
performance of our method was investigated in comparison with 4 baseline word 
embedding methods on a corpus of 9516 annotated tweets.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI220182
PMID: 35673121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]