1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 16;22(6):3010. doi: 10.3390/ijms22063010.

Applications of Metabolomics in Forensic Toxicology and Forensic Medicine.

Szeremeta M(1), Pietrowska K(2), Niemcunowicz-Janica A(1), Kretowski A(2)(3), 
Ciborowski M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of Bialystok, 15-269 
Bialystok, Poland.
(2)Metabolomics Laboratory, Clinical Research Center, Medical University of 
Bialystok, 15-276 Bialystok, Poland.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Medical 
University of Bialystok,15-276 Bialystok, Poland.

Forensic toxicology and forensic medicine are unique among all other medical 
fields because of their essential legal impact, especially in civil and criminal 
cases. New high-throughput technologies, borrowed from chemistry and physics, 
have proven that metabolomics, the youngest of the "omics sciences", could be 
one of the most powerful tools for monitoring changes in forensic disciplines. 
Metabolomics is a particular method that allows for the measurement of metabolic 
changes in a multicellular system using two different approaches: targeted and 
untargeted. Targeted studies are focused on a known number of defined 
metabolites. Untargeted metabolomics aims to capture all metabolites present in 
a sample. Different statistical approaches (e.g., uni- or multivariate 
statistics, machine learning) can be applied to extract useful and important 
information in both cases. This review aims to describe the role of metabolomics 
in forensic toxicology and in forensic medicine.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22063010
PMCID: PMC8002074
PMID: 33809459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Arch Toxicol. 2019 Dec;93(12):3387-3396. doi: 10.1007/s00204-019-02593-5. Epub 
2019 Oct 29.

Review of high-content screening applications in toxicology.

Li S(1), Xia M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division for Pre-Clinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 9800 Medical Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Division for Pre-Clinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 9800 Medical Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA. mxia@mail.nih.gov.

High-content screening (HCS) technology combining automated microscopy and 
quantitative image analysis can address biological questions in academia and the 
pharmaceutical industry. Various HCS experimental applications have been 
utilized in the research field of in vitro toxicology. In this review, we 
describe several HCS application approaches used for studying the mechanism of 
compound toxicity, highlight some challenges faced in the toxicological 
community, and discuss the future directions of HCS in regards to new models, 
new reagents, data management, and informatics. Many specialized areas of 
toxicology including developmental toxicity, genotoxicity, developmental 
neurotoxicity/neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity 
will be examined. In addition, several newly developed cellular assay models 
including induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), three-dimensional (3D) cell 
models, and tissues-on-a-chip will be discussed. New genome-editing technologies 
(e.g., CRISPR/Cas9), data analyzing tools for imaging, and coupling with 
high-content assays will be reviewed. Finally, the applications of machine 
learning to image processing will be explored. These new HCS approaches offer a 
huge step forward in dissecting biological processes, developing drugs, and 
making toxicology studies easier.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-019-02593-5
PMCID: PMC7011178
PMID: 31664499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


3. Adv Healthc Mater. 2020 Sep;9(17):e1901862. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201901862. Epub 
2020 Jul 6.

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Computational Nanotoxicology: 
Unlocking and Empowering Nanomedicine.

Singh AV(1), Ansari MHD(2)(3), Rosenkranz D(1), Maharjan RS(1), Kriegel FL(1), 
Gandhi K(4), Kanase A(5), Singh R(6), Laux P(1), Luch A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Product Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk 
Assessment (BfR), Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, Berlin, 10589, Germany.
(2)The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via Rinaldo Piaggio 
34, Pontedera, 56025, Italy.
(3)Department of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via 
Rinaldo Piaggio 34, Pontedera, 56025, Italy.
(4)Bosch Sensortec GmbH, Gerhard-Kindler-Straße 9, Reutlingen, 72770, Germany.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02215, 
USA.
(6)Rajarshi Shahu College of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra, 411033, India.

Advances in nanomedicine, coupled with novel methods of creating advanced 
materials at the nanoscale, have opened new perspectives for the development of 
healthcare and medical products. Special attention must be paid toward safe 
design approaches for nanomaterial-based products. Recently, artificial 
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) gifted the computational tool for 
enhancing and improving the simulation and modeling process for nanotoxicology 
and nanotherapeutics. In particular, the correlation of in vitro generated 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics to in vivo application scenarios is an 
important step toward the development of safe nanomedicinal products. This 
review portrays how in vitro and in vivo datasets are used in in silico models 
to unlock and empower nanomedicine. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 
modeling and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME)-based in 
silico methods along with dosimetry models as a focus area for nanomedicine are 
mainly described. The computational OMICS, colloidal particle determination, and 
algorithms to establish dosimetry for inhalation toxicology, and quantitative 
structure-activity relationships at nanoscale (nano-QSAR) are revisited. The 
challenges and opportunities facing the blind spots in nanotoxicology in this 
computationally dominated era are highlighted as the future to accelerate 
nanomedicine clinical translation.

© 2020 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/adhm.201901862
PMID: 32627972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Med Toxicol. 2020 Oct;16(4):458-464. doi: 10.1007/s13181-020-00769-5. Epub 
2020 Mar 25.

The Role and Promise of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Toxicology.

Chary MA(1)(2), Manini AF(3), Boyer EW(4), Burns M(5).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical Toxicology Program, Department of Emergency Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. michael.chary@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA. michael.chary@childrens.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(5)Harvard Medical Toxicology Program, Department of Emergency Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to machines or software that process 
information and interact with the world as understanding beings. Examples of AI 
in medicine include the automated reading of chest X-rays and the detection of 
heart dysrhythmias from wearables. A key promise of AI is its potential to apply 
logical reasoning at the scale of data too vast for the human mind to 
comprehend. This scaling up of logical reasoning may allow clinicians to bring 
the entire breadth of current medical knowledge to bear on each patient in real 
time. It may also unearth otherwise unreachable knowledge in the attempt to 
integrate knowledge and research across disciplines. In this review, we discuss 
two complementary aspects of artificial intelligence: deep learning and 
knowledge representation. Deep learning recognizes and predicts patterns. 
Knowledge representation structures and interprets those patterns or 
predictions. We frame this review around how deep learning and knowledge 
representation might expand the reach of Poison Control Centers and enhance 
syndromic surveillance from social media.

DOI: 10.1007/s13181-020-00769-5
PMCID: PMC7554271
PMID: 32215849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None


5. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Jun 18;11:759. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00759. eCollection 
2020.

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Applied at the Point of Care.

Angehrn Z(1), Haldna L(1), Zandvliet AS(1), Gil Berglund E(1), Zeeuw J(2), Amzal 
B(1), Cheung SYA(1), Polasek TM(1)(3)(4), Pfister M(1)(5), Kerbusch T(1), 
Heckman NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Certara, Princeton, NJ, United States.
(2)PacMed, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(4)Centre for Medicines Use and Safety, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, Children's University 
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: The increasing availability of healthcare data and rapid 
development of big data analytic methods has opened new avenues for use of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)- and Machine Learning (ML)-based technology in 
medical practice. However, applications at the point of care are still scarce.
OBJECTIVE: Review and discuss case studies to understand current capabilities 
for applying AI/ML in the healthcare setting, and regulatory requirements in the 
US, Europe and China.
METHODS: A targeted narrative literature review of AI/ML based digital tools was 
performed. Scientific publications (identified in PubMed) and grey literature 
(identified on the websites of regulatory agencies) were reviewed and analyzed.
RESULTS: From the regulatory perspective, AI/ML-based solutions can be 
considered medical devices (i.e., Software as Medical Device, SaMD). A case 
series of SaMD is presented. First, tools for monitoring and remote management 
of chronic diseases are presented. Second, imaging applications for diagnostic 
support are discussed. Finally, clinical decision support tools to facilitate 
the choice of treatment and precision dosing are reviewed. While tested and 
validated algorithms for precision dosing exist, their implementation at the 
point of care is limited, and their regulatory and commercialization pathway is 
not clear. Regulatory requirements depend on the level of risk associated with 
the use of the device in medical practice, and can be classified into 
administrative (manufacturing and quality control), software-related (design, 
specification, hazard analysis, architecture, traceability, software risk 
analysis, cybersecurity, etc.), clinical evidence (including patient 
perspectives in some cases), non-clinical evidence (dosing validation and 
biocompatibility/toxicology) and other, such as e.g. benefit-to-risk 
determination, risk assessment and mitigation. There generally is an alignment 
between the US and Europe. China additionally requires that the clinical 
evidence is applicable to the Chinese population and recommends that a 
third-party central laboratory evaluates the clinical trial results.
CONCLUSIONS: The number of promising AI/ML-based technologies is increasing, but 
few have been implemented widely at the point of care. The need for external 
validation, implementation logistics, and data exchange and privacy remain the 
main obstacles.

Copyright © 2020 Angehrn, Haldna, Zandvliet, Gil Berglund, Zeeuw, Amzal, Cheung, 
Polasek, Pfister, Kerbusch and Heckman.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00759
PMCID: PMC7314939
PMID: 32625083


6. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2019 Feb;40(2):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2018.12.001. 
Epub 2018 Dec 26.

Toxicogenomics: A 2020 Vision.

Liu Z(1), Huang R(2), Roberts R(3), Tong W(4).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA. Electronic address: 
zhichao.liu@fda.hhs.gov.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
(3)ApconiX, BioHub at Alderley Park, Alderley Edge, SK10 4TG, UK; University of 
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(4)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA. Electronic address: 
weida.tong@fda.hhs.gov.

Toxicogenomics (TGx) has contributed significantly to toxicology and now has 
great potential to support moves towards animal-free approaches in regulatory 
decision making. Here, we discuss in vitro TGx systems and their potential 
impact on risk assessment. We raise awareness of the rapid advancement of 
genomics technologies, which generates novel genomics features essential for 
enhanced risk assessment. We specifically emphasize the importance of 
reproducibility in utilizing TGx in the regulatory setting. We also highlight 
the role of machine learning (particularly deep learning) in developing 
TGx-based predictive models. Lastly, we touch on the topics of how TGx 
approaches could facilitate adverse outcome pathways (AOP) development and 
enhance read-across strategies to further regulatory application. Finally, we 
summarize current efforts to develop TGx for risk assessment and set out 
remaining challenges.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2018.12.001
PMID: 30594306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Jun 9. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-051921-023255. Online ahead of print.

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Lead-to-Candidate 
Decision-Making and Beyond.

McNair D(1).

Author information:
(1)Global Health, Integrated Development, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 
Seattle, Washington, USA; email: douglas.mcnair@gatesfoundation.org.

The use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in 
pharmaceutical research and development has to date focused on research: target 
identification; docking-, fragment-, and motif-based generation of compound 
libraries; modeling of synthesis feasibility; rank-ordering likely hits 
according to structural and chemometric similarity to compounds having known 
activity and affinity to the target(s); optimizing a smaller library for 
synthesis and high-throughput screening; and combining evidence from screening 
to support hit-to-lead decisions. Applying AI/ML methods to lead optimization 
and lead-to-candidate (L2C) decision-making has shown slower progress, 
especially regarding predicting absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, 
and toxicology properties. The present review surveys reasons why this is so, 
reports progress that has occurred in recent years, and summarizes some of the 
issues that remain. Effective AI/ML tools to derisk L2C and later phases of 
development are important to accelerate the pharmaceutical development process, 
ameliorate escalating development costs, and achieve greater success rates. 
Expected final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Volume 63 is January 2023. Please see 
http://www.annualreviews.org/page/journal/pubdates for revised estimates.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-051921-023255
PMID: 35679624


8. Drug Discov Today. 2022 Sep 9;27(11):103351. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.103351. 
Online ahead of print.

Combining DELs and machine learning for toxicology prediction.

Blay V(1), Li X(2), Gerlach J(3), Urbina F(3), Ekins S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Environmental Toxicology, University of 
California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. Electronic address: 
vroger@ucsc.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
(3)Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 840 Main Campus Drive, Lab 3510, 
Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.
(4)Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 840 Main Campus Drive, Lab 3510, 
Raleigh, NC 27606, USA. Electronic address: sean@collaborationspharma.com.

DNA-encoded libraries (DELs) allow starting chemical matter to be identified in 
drug discovery. The volume of experimental data generated also makes DELs an 
attractive resource for machine learning (ML). ML allows modeling complex 
relationships between compounds and numerical endpoints, such as the binding to 
a target measured by DELs. DELs could also empower other areas of drug 
discovery. Here, we propose that DELs and ML could be combined to model binding 
to off-targets, enabling better predictive toxicology. With enough data, ML 
models can make accurate predictions across a vast chemical space, and they can 
be reused and expanded across projects. Although there are limitations, more 
general toxicology models could be applied earlier during drug discovery, 
illuminating safety liabilities at a lower cost.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.103351
PMID: 36096360

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: S.E. is the owner, and J.G. and 
F.U. are employees, of Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc.


9. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Mol Sci. 2020 Jul-Aug;10(4):e1475. doi: 
10.1002/wcms.1475. Epub 2020 Mar 31.

In silico toxicology: From structure-activity relationships towards deep 
learning and adverse outcome pathways.

Hemmerich J(1), Ecker GF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry University of Vienna Vienna Austria.

In silico toxicology is an emerging field. It gains increasing importance as 
research is aiming to decrease the use of animal experiments as suggested in the 
3R principles by Russell and Burch. In silico toxicology is a means to identify 
hazards of compounds before synthesis, and thus in very early stages of drug 
development. For chemical industries, as well as regulatory agencies it can aid 
in gap-filling and guide risk minimization strategies. Techniques such as 
structural alerts, read-across, quantitative structure-activity relationship, 
machine learning, and deep learning allow to use in silico toxicology in many 
cases, some even when data is scarce. Especially the concept of adverse outcome 
pathways puts all techniques into a broader context and can elucidate 
predictions by mechanistic insights. This article is categorized under:Structure 
and Mechanism > Computational Biochemistry and BiophysicsData Science > 
Chemoinformatics.

© 2020 The Authors. WIREs Computational Molecular Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/wcms.1475
PMCID: PMC9286356
PMID: 35866138

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflicts of 
interest for this article.


10. J Comput Chem. 2017 Jun 15;38(16):1291-1307. doi: 10.1002/jcc.24764. Epub 2017 
Mar 8.

Deep learning for computational chemistry.

Goh GB(1), Hodas NO(1), Vishnu A(1).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Computing, Mathematics, and Data Division, Pacific Northwest 
National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Blvd, Richland, Washington, 99354.

The rise and fall of artificial neural networks is well documented in the 
scientific literature of both computer science and computational chemistry. Yet 
almost two decades later, we are now seeing a resurgence of interest in deep 
learning, a machine learning algorithm based on multilayer neural networks. 
Within the last few years, we have seen the transformative impact of deep 
learning in many domains, particularly in speech recognition and computer 
vision, to the extent that the majority of expert practitioners in those field 
are now regularly eschewing prior established models in favor of deep learning 
models. In this review, we provide an introductory overview into the theory of 
deep neural networks and their unique properties that distinguish them from 
traditional machine learning algorithms used in cheminformatics. By providing an 
overview of the variety of emerging applications of deep neural networks, we 
highlight its ubiquity and broad applicability to a wide range of challenges in 
the field, including quantitative structure activity relationship, virtual 
screening, protein structure prediction, quantum chemistry, materials design, 
and property prediction. In reviewing the performance of deep neural networks, 
we observed a consistent outperformance against non-neural networks 
state-of-the-art models across disparate research topics, and deep neural 
network-based models often exceeded the "glass ceiling" expectations of their 
respective tasks. Coupled with the maturity of GPU-accelerated computing for 
training deep neural networks and the exponential growth of chemical data on 
which to train these networks on, we anticipate that deep learning algorithms 
will be a valuable tool for computational chemistry. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcc.24764
PMID: 28272810


11. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2022 May;52(3):511-525.

Abstracts of Presentations at the Association of Clinical Scientists 143(rd) 
Meeting Louisville, KY May 11-14,2022.

[No authors listed]

[1] Abraham J. Gitlitz Memorial Lecture: Development of a BroadSpectrum 
Antiviral-based Intranasal Spray as a Pandemic Preparedness Strategy. Kenneth E. 
Palmer, Ph.D, Center for Predictive Medicine for Biodefense and Emerging 
Infectious Diseases and Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY In early 2020, the public health 
emergency prompted many researchers to contemplate how they might contribute to 
control of the COVID-19 pandemic. This presentation will detail the research 
steps taken to bring a novel broad spectrum antiviral protein into a first in 
humans clinical trial. We had been developing a broad spectrum antiviral 
protein, the lectin Q-Griffithsin (Q-GRFT), as a topical microbicide for HIV-1 
prevention. We knew that Q-GRFT also inhibited replication of many members of 
the Coronavirus family of pathogens, so initiated a rapid preclinical and 
clinical development program of a Q-GRFT intranasal spray as a prophylaxis 
modality against SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. We finalized a 
suitable formulation to deliver Q-GRFT to the nasopharynx, the initial site of 
replication of SARS-CoV-2. Non-clinical toxicology studies supported 
first-in-human clinical studies. Efficacy studies in mice and hamsters provided 
proof of concept that Q-GRFT can protect animals against challenge. We filed an 
investigational new drug (IND) application, and received study may proceed 
authorization from the FDA. We conducted a randomized, placebo-controlled single 
dose safety and pharmacokinetics clinical study in 18 volunteers, all of whom 
had been vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2. The product was safe, and enhanced the 
levels of SARS-CoV-2 as well as MERS-CoV inhibitory activity present in the 
nasal and naso-pharyngeal swabs. The safety and pharmacokinetics profile of our 
Q-GRFT intranasal spray supports a multi-dose Phase 1b clinical study, and 
further development as a general pandemic preparedness strategy. Upon completion 
of this activity, participants should be able to: describe the preclinical and 
clinical strategies employed to support a first in humans clinical trial of a 
novel broad-spectrum antiviral protein containing nasal spray; discuss planning, 
design and execution of a first-in-humans Phase 1a clinical trial for evaluation 
of safety, and selection of a dosing strategy for a Phase 1b multiple dose 
safety and pharmacokinetics study. [2] Acetylation pharmacogenomics: paradigm 
for informed individual risk assessment following environmental carcinogen 
exposure. David W. Hein, Ph.D, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY Human 
epidemiological studies associating chemical exposures to cancer risk often are 
inconsistently validated across studies. Examples include the effect of smoking 
on cancer etiology other than the lung, such as urinary bladder and breast. 
Research findings from the laboratory have improved the understanding of 
arylamine carcinogen metabolism leading to improved design and interpretation of 
human molecular epidemiology investigations. Laboratory studies that infer and 
test biological plausibility, including cancer risks modified by differential 
metabolism of arylamine carcinogens in rapid and slow arylamine 
N-acetyltransferase (NAT2) acetylators, have been critical for investigating the 
role of smoking in the etiology of human cancers. This chapter will illustrate 
these concepts with an example of a cancer in which the role of smoking has 
largely been validated (urinary bladder cancer) and examples where a consensus 
has yet to be achieved. Portions of this work were funded by the following NIH 
grants: R01-CA034627; T32-ES011564; P42-ES023716; P20-GM113226; R25-CA134283; 
and P30-ES030283. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able 
to: 1. Assess the role of genetic polymorphisms in individual risk assessments 
following exposures to environmental carcinogens. 2. Recognize the importance of 
laboratory-based data in the biological plausibility of individual risk 
assessments. 3. Recognize the genetic complexity inherent in human 
epidemiological studies. [3] Rolling with the punches: A biosafety program at a 
research university addresses COVID-19. Allen Helm, PhD, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL This presentation describes the biosafety program at a 
research university and medical center, demonstrating how the program was 
modified during the COVID-19 pandemic. Biosafety professionals are tasked with 
facilitating biomedical research by enacting coordinated efforts to protect 
research staff and students, the larger research community, and the environment 
and ecosystem from biological hazards used in the laboratory. These hazards 
include recombinant organisms ranging from microorganisms to animals, microbial 
pathogens, human-derived material, and biological toxins. The University of 
Chicago (UChicago) is an academic research institution affiliated with an urban 
medical center. There are approximately 300 biomedical principal 
investigator-led laboratories conducting investigations in basic, translational, 
and clinical science. The biosafety program at UChicago is part of the Office of 
Research Safety and consists of a director and four biosafety officers who 
perform a variety of duties, including: 1) Assisting researchers in planning 
experiments that utilize biohazards; 2) Developing and delivering biosafety 
training courses; 3) Performing annual inspections of laboratories; 4) Working 
with the university's Institutional Biosafety Committee; 5) Ensuring compliance 
with local, state, and federal agencies. The COVID-19 pandemic affected the 
biosafety program in several ways, as follows: 1) Altering administrative 
operations; 2) Developing biosafety standards for investigators working with 
SARS-CoV-2; 3) Establishing a "COVID Core" to handle influx of said researchers; 
4) Enhanced biosafety interactions with clinical laboratories due to a demand 
for vaccines and treatments. Upon completion of this activity, participants 
should be able to: 1. Identify the role of biosafety professionals in basic, 
translational, and clinical research. 2. Recognize how a pandemic can alter the 
way biosafety services are delivered to research programs. 3. Recognize the need 
for flexibility in a successful biosafety program. [4] An interdisciplinary Post 
Operative Personalized Pain Management Clinical Trial. Loralie J. Langman1, 
Jeremy Gaskins2, Gwendolyn A. McMillin3, Paul J. Jannetto1, Brandi Hartley4, 
Arthur Malkani4, and Saeed A. Jortani5, department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, 2Departments of 
Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, KY, 3Department of Pathology, University of Utah, ARUP Institute for 
Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, 4Departments of 
Orthopedic Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 
and 5Departments of Pathology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of Louisville 
School of Medicine, Louisville, KY Various sources of variability in response 
and toxicity to hydrocodone were investigated. In a cohort of orthopedic surgery 
patients, we interrogated the associations between genetic, intrinsic and 
extrinsic patient factors, plasma concentrations of hydrocodone and metabolites, 
common side effects, and pain score. Data for each patient was collected by the 
review of the electronic medical record and a patient interview at the time of 
sample collection. Patients with trauma or undergoing scheduled elective surgery 
for total knee or total hip replacement at the University of Louisville, Baptist 
East, and Jewish Hospitals, Louisville, KY. Plasma opiate concentrations and a 
targeted genotyping panel were performed. We observed statistically significant 
correlations for daily (p<0.001) and total dose (p=0.002) of hydrocodone. 
Duration of in-hospital and duration of opioid therapy for patients were also 
significantly different based on their genotypes. The length of opioid 
administration was significantly shorter in CYP2D6 EM/UM compared to patients 
with CYP2D6 PM/IM genotypes (p=0.018). Subjects with the OPRM1 c.118G 
polymorphism were also on opioids for a longer period of time (p=0.022). 
Co-administration of medications with CYP2D6 inhibitor activity had a 
significant effect on the length of opioid therapy (P<0.001). Both the hospital 
stay period and days of opioid use post hospital discharge were greater in 
patients with the inhibitor-adjusted CYP2D6 phenotype (p<0.001). This trial 
showed that patients should be evaluated for the use of inhibitors of CYP2D6. 
Interaction with these therapeutics while administering hydrocodone therapy can 
alter the phenotype of the patient (phenocopy) and result in longer opioid 
therapy duration. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able 
to: 1. to discuss various sources of variability to response and toxicity of 
analgesics. 2. to present the post-operative pain management trial in a cohort 
of women just undergone Cesarean Section. 3. to present the post-operative pain 
management trial in a cohort of lower extremity orthopedic patients. [6] Claude 
P. Brown Memorial Lecture: The Many Roads to Steatohepatitis and its Treatment. 
Craig J. McClain, MD, University of Louisville School of Medicine,Louisville, KY 
Hepatic steatosis and steatohepatitis are common histologic findings that can be 
caused by multiple etiologies. The three most frequent causes for steatosis/ 
steatohepatitis are alcohol (alcohol-associated steatohepatitis, ASH), 
obesity/metabolic syndrome (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, NASH), and 
environmental toxicants (toxicant-associated steatohepatitis, TASH). Hepatic 
steatosis is an early occurrence in all three forms of liver disease, and they 
often share common pathways to disease progression/severity. Disease progression 
is a result of both direct effects on the liver as well as indirect alterations 
in other organs/tissues such as intestine, adipose tissue, and the immune 
system. Although the three liver diseases (ASH, NASH, and TASH) sharemany common 
pathogenic mechanisms, they also exhibit distinct differences. Both shared and 
divergent mechanisms can be potential therapeutic targets. I will provide an 
overview of selected important mechanistic similarities and differences in ASH, 
NASH, and TASH, and discuss the importance of a multidisciplinary and 
personalized approach. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to: 1. understand the mechanisms including similarities and differences 
between ASH, NASH and TASH. 2. understand targets to treat ASH, NASH and TASH. 
3. recognize tests to help distinguish between ASH, NASH and TASH. [7] Bioactive 
lipid metabolites: biomarkers and therapeutic targets in alcohol-associated 
liver disease. Dennis Warner, Josiah Hardesty, Jeff Warner, Craig McClain, Irina 
Kirpich, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY Alcohol-associated liver 
disease (ALD) is a spectrum of liver disorders ranging from steatosis to 
steatohepatitis, fibrosis and cirrhosis. The mechanisms and mediators of ALD 
progression are not well understood and effective therapeutic options are 
limited. Various bioactive oxidized lipid mediators (oxylipins) have recently 
emerged as important factors in ALD pathogenesis. The current study aimed to 
examine plasma linoleic acid (LA)-derived lipid metabolites in heavy drinking 
individuals and to evaluate associations between these molecules and markers of 
liver injury. Analysis of plasma LA-derived metabolites was performed by HPLC/MS 
on 66 heavy drinking individuals and 29 socially drinking but otherwise healthy 
volunteers. Based on plasma ALT levels, 15 patients had no liver injury (ALT ≤ 
40 U/L), 33 patients had mild liver injury (ALT > 40 U/L), and 18 were diagnosed 
with moderate Alcohol-associated Hepatitis (mAH). Statistically significant 
differences (set at p<0.05) were determined by One-way ANOVA. 
Lipoxygenase-derived LA metabolites, 13-HODE and 13-oxoODE, were markedly 
elevated only in mAH patients. The CYP450-derived LA epoxides, 9,10-EpOME and 
12.13-EpOME were decreased in all patients regardless of the presence or the 
absence of liver injury. LA-derived diols, 9,10-DiHOME and 12.13-DiHOME, were 
elevated only in the mAH group. The current study provides evidence that 
specific changes in LA-metabolites in heavy drinking individuals can distinguish 
individuals with mAH from those with mild ALD. Upon completion of this activity, 
participants should be able to: 1. identify effects of alcohol consumption on 
circulating oxylipins; 2. determine the role of oxylipins in ALD pathogenesis; 
3. associate severity of ALD with the specific changes in oxylipins [8] Hepatic 
protein and phosphoprotein signatures of alcohol-associated hepatitis. Josiah 
Hardesty, Jeffrey Warner, Dennis Warner, Craig McClain, and Irina Kirpich, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY The objective of the current study was 
to identify hepatic proteome and phosphoproteome signatures of 
alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH). AH is a clinical manifestation of ALD 
characterized by compromised liver function contributing to a 6-month mortality 
rate as high as 50%. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were conducted on 
explant liver tissue from AH patients (n=6) and non-AH controls (n=12). Data 
were statistically compared by an unpaired Student's t-test and a p < 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant. Alterations the expression of multiple 
proteins involved in various biological processes were observed in AH. Among 
significant findings in AH included elevated expression of pro-fibrotic 
transcription factors, reduced albumin (ALBU) phosphorylation, and diminished 
expression of functional mitochondria proteins. One transcription factor 
involved in fibrogenesis, yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) was 
elevated in AH (p=0.003), along with increased phosphorylation at pS105 
(p=0.01). In addition, expression of hepatic ALBU was elevated in AH (p=0.04) 
concomitant with diminished ALBU phosphorylation (p=0.02), which may prevent 
ALBU release leading to hypoalbuminemia. Lastly, we found a loss in the 
expression of mitochondria proteins in AH, including enzymes essential for 
mitochondria function and biogenesis (e.g., hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
trifunctional multienzyme complex subunit alpha, [ECHA] p=0.04). This study 
identified hepatic protein and phosphoprotein signatures of AH which may 
facilitate the development of novel therapeutic strategies. Upon completion of 
this activity, participants should be able to: 1. understand the hepatic 
proteomic changes that occur in AH, 2. recognize hepatic protein and 
phosphoprotein signatures of AH and 3. identify novel mechanisms and pathways 
implicated in AH. [9] Soluble epoxide hydrolase inhibition in alcohol-associated 
liver disease: liver-specific drug delivery. Jeffrey Warner, Josiah Hardesty, 
Ying Song, Philip Bauer, Chirag Soni, Claudio Maldonado, Craig McClain, Dennis 
Warner, Irina Kirpich, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 
Alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) is a prevalent condition resulting from 
excessive alcohol consumption. Advanced stages of ALD, such as 
alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH), cause significant mortality and lack 
effective therapies. Previous data established that soluble epoxide hydrolase 
(sEH, an enzyme which degrades beneficial lipid epoxides) is induced in 
clinical/ experimental ALD, and that sEH inhibition may be an effective 
treatment for this disease. This study aimed to improve this approach by using 
liverspecific drug delivery via fusogenic lipid vesicles (FLVs) to increase 
efficacy and avoid extra-hepatic side effects. We prepared fluorescent-labeled 
FLVs loaded with the sEH inhibitor t-TUCB (t-TUCB-FLVs) at various doses. 
t-TUCB-FLV preparations had an appropriate size and charge and were confirmed to 
target the liver by fluorescent microscopy. Flow cytometry demonstrated that 
hepatocytes and macrophages were most responsible for t-TUCB-FLV uptake. In a 
dose response experiment using a chronic-binge ethanol feeding model mimicking 
AH, mice receiving ethanol+3.0 mg/kg t-TUCB-FLVs had the greatest reduction in 
liver injury by plasma ALT. This treatment was more efficacious than 
systemically delivered (non-FLV-encapsulated) t-TUCB at the same dose. 
t-TUCB-FLVs also decreased liver cell death and ER stress but had no effect on 
steatosis or neutrophil infiltration. These data demonstrated that 
liver-specific delivery of t-TUCB was more efficacious than systemic delivery. 
This drug delivery platform may help increase the efficacy of sEH inhibition in 
ALD while reducing extra-hepatic side effects, improving translation to humans. 
Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 1.recognize 
the pathogenic role of sEH in ALD; 2. Describe basic concepts in liver-specific 
drug delivery by nanoparticle systems; and 3. Evaluate the beneficial effects of 
a liver-targeted sEH inhibitor in experimental ALD in mice. [10] COVID-19 and 
early post-primary TB: commonalities of pathobiology in pneumonitis and 
therapies. Robert L. Hunter and Robert E.Brown, UTHealth McGovern Medical School 
Houston, TX Concurrent infection with COVID-19 and M. tuberculosis has been 
reported to be more severe than either alone, resulting in increased mortality. 
Our objective was to define the shared pathobiology of COVID-19 and the 
developmental stage of TB in the lung and explore adjunctive therapies to treat 
such commonalities. We used similar morphoproteomic analyses to study lung 
tissues of patients with early postprimary tuberculosis or COVID-19 
infection.These studies showed colocalization of the COVID-19 virus and M. 
tuberculosis antigens with cyclo-oxygenase-2 and fatty acid synthase in the 
reactive alveolar pneumocytes and with programmed death-ligand 1 expression on 
the alveolar interstitium and alveolar pneumocytes.This was associated with 
accumulation of pro-infectious M2 polarized macrophages in the alveolar 
spaces.The commonalities in these pathways suggest that they might be 
susceptible to adjunctive therapies with metformin and vitamin D3. This is 
supported by published studies that metformin and vitamin D3 could reduce the 
severity of both COVID-19 and early post-primary TB infections. Upon completion 
of this activity, participants should be able to identify and define the 
commonalities in the pathobiology of COVID-19 and early post-primary TB 
pneumonitis and describe the potential targets for therapy with metformin and 
vitamin D3. [11] Plasma ctDNA for Monitoring Response to Immune Check Point 
Inhibitors. Mark W. Linder PhD, DABCC, FAACC. Professor Department of Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, KY Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) measurements from a variety of 
malignancies are aggressively being investigated in the context of a "liquid 
biopsy" to provide for a minimally invasive means of monitoring tumor status and 
therapeutic response. This session will discuss what is known about the biologic 
and physiological characteristics of plasma ctDNA. We will then describe the 
what is known regarding the relationship between plasma ctDNA and tumor 
characteristics such as tumor burden, proliferative activity and therapeutic 
response . Understanding of these relationships is central to developing a 
fundamental framework for interpretation longitudinal plasma ctDNA measurements 
in light of other routine measurements such as radiographic assessments and 
other blood based biomarkers. Upon completion of this activity, participants 
should be able to: 1. Explain the sources and methods of measurement of ctDNA. 
2. Describe the relationships between plasma ctDNA, disease burden and 
therapeutic response. 3. Discuss how these relationships influence the clinical 
utility of routine plasma ctDNA testing. [12] Quantitative Methods of Monitoring 
Circulating Tumor DNA. Evan M. Alexander, PhD, Roland Valdes Jr., PhD, DABCC, 
Mark Linder, PhD, DABCC, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is 
emerging as a new, robust biomarker that can be used for early cancer diagnosis, 
disease prognosis and even guiding treatment through precision medicine. This 
non-invasive tumor monitoring tool can be performed on the scale of a single 
gene mutation to an entire sequenced genome. Quantitation of ctDNA is 
complicated by two factors: wide ranges and low concentrations (0.003%-95% 
mutant allele frequency (MAF); 5-1500 ng/mL). Currently, the field of monitoring 
ctDNA is dominated by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) based technologies. Understandably, these different monitoring 
techniques require specialized analytical instrumentation. Furthermore, the 
sensitivity and specificity of these methods are not universal. There are many 
considerations a clinician needs to be mindful of when utilizing these 
technologies to monitor ctDNA (known vs unknown mutation, absolute quantitation 
vs MAF). Understanding the strengths and weaknesses of ct DNA quantification 
methods in a given clinical situation is paramount in utilizing this biomarker 
to its fullest and most appropriate potential. Upon completion of this activity, 
participants should be able to: 1. Identify which quantitation technique for 
ctDNA is most appropriate to use in a given clinical scenario 2. Recognize the 
difference between quantitation of mutant allele frequency and absolute 
quantitation of ctDNA 3. Recognize the importance of assay sensitivity when 
serially monitoring patient cancer progression. [13] The Value of Next 
Generation Sequencing in Myeloid Neoplasia. Mustafa Al-Kawaaz, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, KY This presentation will demonstrate some of the most 
important utilities of next generation sequencing (NGS) in a spectrum of acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), myelodysplastic 
syndrome (MDS) and overlap syndromes. Interrogation of nucleic acid (DNA and/or 
RNA) to look for certain genomic alterations is essential for diagnostic, 
prognostic, and therapeutic purposes. Classification of myeloid neoplasms 
continues to evolve by including entities defined by specific genomic 
alterations. NGS is an essential utility to guide management decisions. Upon 
completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 1. Recognize 
changes to classification of myeloid neoplasms and some categories definite by 
genetic alterations. 2. Identify the utility of different vendors/ platforms 
offering certain advantages in next generation sequencing. 3. Recommend testing 
utility by evaluating the targeted genetic alteration as well as clinical 
scenario. [14] Forecasting clinical behavior and therapeutic response of breast 
carcinoma using gene expression. James L. Wittliff and Michael W. Daniels, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY Our goal is to associate expression of 
nuclear and peptide hormone receptor genes with biomarker status of breast 
carcinoma and risk of recurrence, to advance clinical management. Cellular 
heterogeneity of tissue specimens is a complicating factor in determining 
analyte (protein or gene) levels of specific cell types. A unique deidentified 
database was analyzed that contained microarray results of 22,000 genes derived 
only from total RNA extracted from breast carcinoma cells procured by laser 
capture microdissection (Pixcell IIe:Arcturus®/ Thermo Fisher) of 247 
de-identified primary tissue biopsies. Relative expression levels of each gene 
candidate for 49 nuclear receptors as well as 61 peptide/protein hormones and 81 
of their cognate receptor proteins were selected for this retrospective 
investigation. Assessment of a patient's risk of recurrence primarily utilizes 
estrogen (ER) and progestin receptor proteins (PR), quantified by radio-ligand 
binding (NEN/DuPont) and/or enzyme immunoassay (Abbott Labs). Parameters and 
clinical outcomes were analyzed by univariable and multivariable Cox 
regressions, Fisher's Exact Test, Kaplan Meier plots and with R software v4.0.0. 
Examples of multivariable Cox regression models of candidates of nuclear 
receptor genes, fit to predict disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival 
(OS), revealed that only NR4A2, PGR, PPARA and THRB were required to predict DFS 
and NR3C2, PGR and THRB were necessary to predict OS. Of 142 candidate genes for 
peptide hormones and their cognate receptors, 30 exhibited expression levels 
that individually predicted DFS and/or OS. When pairs of genes for a peptide 
hormone and its receptor were evaluated by multivariable Cox Regression with 
interaction, complexes were identified that predicted DFS and OS (EDN1-ENDRA, 
GHRL-GHSR, INHBB-ACVR2B, NPY-NPY1R, INHBB-ACVR1B, RLN2-RXFP3 and NPY-NPY6R) 
based on unadjusted p-value for the interaction term. These investigations also 
revealed numerous over-expressed genes in carcinomas with poor clinical outcomes 
suggesting candidates for development of novel therapeutics. Collectively, use 
of small molecular signatures (gene subsets) with quantified ER/PR protein or 
ESR1/ PGR expression in a breast carcinoma with clinical outcomes enhanced 
prediction of risk of recurrence and identification drug development candidates. 
Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 1. recognize 
the power of LCM to non-disruptively capture populations of specific cell types 
for genomics testing, 2. differentiate gene expression patterns based upon 
protein tumor marker status groups and 3. predict risk of recurrence for 
patients based upon expression of gene molecular sign. [15] Imaging Mass 
Spectrometry: Applications in Biomedical Research and Clinical Diagnosis. 
Yusheng Zhu, PhD; Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine Hershey 
Medical Center, Hershey, PA Mass spectrometry tissue imaging is a technology 
used in mass spectrometry to visualize the spatial distribution of molecules in 
tissues by their molecular masses. Compared to traditional tissue imaging 
methods such as immunohistochemistry, mass spectrometry imaging does not need 
any antibodies and tracers; it can detect and map multiple analytes including 
proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, lipids, carbohydrates, metabolites, drugs, 
toxins, and even elements simultaneously; researchers do not need prior 
knowledge of molecules in the samples; the analysis can be qualitative and/or 
quantitative. Therefore, mass spectrometry imaging has become a powerful 
technology for biomedical research and biomarker discovery. It is widely used in 
proteomic, peptidomic, lipidomic, glycomic, metabolomic, pharmacological and 
toxicological studies. This session will introduce common mass spectrometry 
imaging techniques including matrix assistant laser desorption ionization-time 
of flight (MALDI-TOF) imaging, time of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometry 
(TOF-SIMS) imaging, and desorption electrospray ionization (DESI)-mass 
spectrometry imaging. In addition, the basic principle, procedure, and 
application of these methods in biomedical research and clinical diagnosis will 
be discussed. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 
1. Define tissue imaging mass spectrometry. 2. Explain basic principle of common 
types of imaging mass spectrometry. 3. Describe application of tissue imaging 
mass spectrometry in biomedical research and clinical diagnosis. [16] Immune 
Landscape in Sentinel Lymph Nodes from Melanoma Patients by Single-Cell Mass 
Cytometry (CyTOF) Analysis. Kavitha Yaddanapudi, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY We describe the development of a multiscale immune profiling 
strategy to map the immune landscape of sentinel lymph nodes (SLN) in our search 
for tumor-driven immune changes that can guide the design of novel 
immunotherapeutic strategies for patients with early-stage melanoma. We used 
mass cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF), flow cytometry, and T cell receptor 
immunosequencing to conduct simultaneous single-cell analyses of immune cells in 
the SLNs of melanoma patients. We identified unique tumordriven T, NK, and 
innate immune cell signatures that are present in stage III melanoma-bearing 
SLNs, but absent in stage I/II non-melanoma-bearing SLNs. We found increased 
effector-memory T cells and TCR clonality selectively in the melanoma-bearing 
SLNs relative to non-melanoma-bearing SLNs, consistent with possible activation 
of an anti-tumor immune response. However, we also observed a markedly 
immunotolerant environment in the melanoma-bearing SLNs indicated by reduced and 
impaired NK cells and increased levels of CD8+CD57+PD-1+ cells which are known 
to display low melanoma killing capabilities. Other changes observed in 
melanoma-bearing SLNs when compared to non-melanoma bearing SLNs include reduced 
CD8+CD69+ T cells/T regulatory cells ratio and high PD-1 expression on CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells. Our data suggests that these immunological changes compromise 
anti-melanoma immunity and contribute to a high relapse rate. Upon completion of 
this activity, participants should be able to describe mass cytometry analysis 
of melanoma patient sentinel lymph node samples, identify new immunologic and 
therapeutic targets for preventing melanoma recurrence and identify unique 
melanoma-driven immune cell signatures. [17] Application of MassARRAY System in 
Molecular Diagnostics - Pharmacogenomics and Oncology. Shuko Harada and 
Alexander C. Mackinnon, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL In 
molecular diagnostic laboratories, multiplex genetic analysis, for example Next 
Generation Sequencing (NGS), is increasingly utilized. NGS is expensive, 
laborious, and requires complicated bioinformatics analysis. The MassARRAY 
system provides accurate, low cost, facile, multiplexed analysis of hundreds of 
clinically relevant mutations with relatively simple analytics. In this study, 
we evaluated the utility of this system for two multiplex, molecular diagnostic 
applications: detection of somatic variants found in brain (CNS) tumors and 
germline variants (SNPs) found in metabolic enzymes as part of a 
pharmacogenomics (PGDX) assay. The CNS assay utilizes a custom design to 
identify deletions involving chromosomes 1p and 19q and somatic variants in 
IDH1, IDH2 and TERT. The PGDX panel targets 68 SNPs and several copy number 
variants (CNV) in 20 metabolic genes implicated in drug metabolisms. Genetic 
targets are PCR amplified followed by primer extension using allele-specific, 
specialized primers. Allotypes are detected by the MassARRAY system and results 
are generated using the MassArray software. Thirty CNS tumor samples with known 
1p19q and IDH1/IDH2 mutation status were analyzed using the CNS panel. The 
results were >95% concordant to orthogonal test results. 48 samples with known 
various genotypes were analyzed using the PGDX assay. The results were >99% 
concordant; intra- and inter-run reproducibility was 100% (n=7). Overall, the 
MassARRAY system is reliable, cost effective and easy to operate. Performance is 
consistent and analysis is streamlined. The MassARRAY platform has broad 
application across multiple indications for molecular diagnostic testing. Upon 
completion of this activity, participants should be able to understand the 
utility of MassARRAY system in molecular diagnostics. [18] Alzheimer's disease 
CSF biomarkers in clinical practice: analytical and clinical considerations. 
Alicia Algeciras-Schimnich, Susan Ashrafzadeh-Kian, Wentao Li, Michelle R. 
Campbell, Ronald Petersen, and Joshua Bornhorst, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN This 
presentation will describe analytical and clinical considerations for the 
appropriate use of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
biomarkers: amyloid beta 1-42 (Aβ4 2), total Tau (t-Tau), and phosphorylated Tau 
(p-Tau). Changes in these biomarkers reflect key changes in AD pathophysiology 
and are being incorporated into clinical practice. One of the challenges with 
the interpretation of CSF biomarkers has been the lack of standardized 
procedures for sample collection and handling as well as the lack of robust 
assays to measure these biomarkers. The analytical characteristics of the Roche 
Elecsys immunoassays for the quantitation of Aβ42, t-Tau, and p-Tau in CSF were 
established. All assays demonstrated robust analytical performance suitable for 
clinical laboratory utilization. To evaluate clinical performance, these 
biomarkers were measured in a cohort of clinically characterized samples 
(n=161). Using a p-Tau/Aβ42 ratio cutoff of >0.023, 20% of cognitively 
unimpaired, 41% of mild cognitive impairment, and 100% of AD dementia patients 
were classified as positive. The use of the p-Tau/Aβ42 ratio showed optimal 
concordance with amyloid PET exhibiting 100% negative and 86% positive 
concordance. Finally, the pattern of these biomarkers was evaluated in 535 Mayo 
Clinic patients that underwent testing as part of a cognitive evaluation over a 
1-year period. In 27% of patients all biomarkers were normal and not consistent 
with AD; in 25% of patients all biomarkers were consistent with AD. A normal 
p-Tau/ Aβ42 ratio with low/abnormal Aβ42 was observed in 19% of patients and was 
most often associated with the clinical presentation of normal pressure 
hydrocephalus (NPH). An abnormal p-Tau/Aβ42 ratio displayed the strongest 
relationship with AD. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to 1. identify the role of Aβ42, t-Tau, and p-Tau in the differential 
diagnosis of AD and 2 discuss how various biomarker patterns are associated with 
other non-AD cognitive disorders. [19] Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2viral RNA 
detection, using Massarray, RT-qPCR and UltraFast RT-PCR assays. Bene 
Ekene-Afolabi1, John Patrick Alao1, Solomon Rotimi1,2, and John Bolodeoku1,3, 
1ZEAB Therapeutic Ltd. Discovery Park, Ramsgate Road, Sandwich, Kent CF13 9FF, 
United Kingdom, 2Department of Biochemistry, Covenant University, Ota, Nigeria, 
and 3JB Consulting MDP Ltd, 1 Bell Street, Maidenhead, Berkshire, SL6 1 BU, 
United Kingdom The Covid-19 pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus revealed 
short comings in the global ability to effectively deal with such crises. In 
particular, the molecular diagnostics market was flooded with a diverse array of 
RT-PCR kits. These kits target different regions of the SARS-CoV-2 genome with 
the United States Centres for Disease Control (CDC) recommended nucleocapsid N1 
and N2 genes being the most common. In addition, these kits use various cycling 
parameters and cut-offs despite being approved for diagnostic testing in various 
countries. Detailed information on the suitability of these tests for the 
clinical detection of SARS-CoV-2 and their performance under laboratory 
conditions remain scarce. In this study, three assays evaluated viral genes in 
synthetic RNA and RNA extracted from SARS-CoV-2 samples stored in viral 
transport medium (VTM) (30 panel certified reference materials), UK NEQAS 
samples and 100 patient samples: 1) Agilent SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR kit for detecting 
the N1 and N2; 2) Agena Bioscience MassArray (MALDI-ToF) SARS-CoV-2 for 
detecting N1, N2, N3, ORF1 & ORF1ab, variant SARS detection, and 3) Molecular 
Biology System UltraFast RT-PCR SARS-CoV-2 Kit for detecting N1, N2, and ORF1ab 
These assays showed good performance, sensitivity and specificity with a limit 
of detection (LOD) as low as 1 copy/ μL. The specificity and sensitivity are 
100% and 98% respectively. These kits thus provide a robust assay for the 
detection of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples. Conclusion: These assays are 
suitable for routine diagnostic. The UltraFast NextGenPCR is the fastest with 
average time (30mins), followed by Agilent (2 hrs) and MassArray (6hrs). Upon 
completion of this activity, participants should be able to examine, measure and 
compare results from different assays for SARS detection, evaluate and diagnose 
accurately, as well as being able to plan, organize and recommend a diagnostic 
procedure for diagnostic laboratory. Key words: SARS-CoV-2, RNA extraction, 
RT-PCR, limit of detection, quantification cycle, COVID-19, in vitro diagnostic 
tests, Agilent, Massarray, Ultrafast. [20] From the Microbiology Lab to the 
Operating Room: Advanced Development of the MasSpec Pen for Broad Clinical Use. 
Livia Eberlin, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX Ambient ionization mass spectrometry techniques that 
enable direct, gentle, and rapid analysis of samples offer exciting 
opportunities to provide clinicians with rich molecular data to enhance 
decision-making. Here, an overview of several ongoing clinical projects in the 
Eberlin laboratory related to the development of a handheld MSbased device, the 
MasSpec Pen technology, for improving patient care will be discussed. In 
particular, I will describe results centered around our efforts in employing the 
MasSpec Pen for intraoperative tissue analysis and cancer detection, 
identification of infectious microorganisms, and detection of drugs of abuse. 
Current challenges and opportunities towards incorporating this technology into 
clinical practice will also be addressed. Upon completion of this activity, 
participants should be able to 1. describe operating principles of direct mass 
spectrometry techniques for rapid molecular analysis that are being explored for 
clinical use; 2. evaluate analytical and diagnostic performance metrics of 
direct mass spectrometry techniques to address unmet clinical needs. [21] 
Triggered MRM for Urine Drug Testing: Finding What You Aren't Looking For. 
Joshua Hayden, Norton Healthcare, Louisville, KY This work aimed to develop a 
triggered multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method for urine drug testing that 
allows simultaneous targeted quantitation of commonly used/abused drugs and 
qualitative detection of a larger array of uncommonly used drugs. Targeted 
quantitation is most often accomplished with triple quadruple mass spectrometers 
but these instruments suffer in their ability to do untargeted analysis. This 
limitation is especially challenging given the ever increasing number of drugs 
that are produced and abused-including fentanyl analogues, bath salts, and a 
broad group of drugs known as spice. Ideally, clinical laboratories would be 
able to perform both targeted quantitation and some level of qualitative 
detection of infrequently encountered drugs. Towards this end, we developed a 
method that allows us to utilize our triple quadruple mass spectrometer to do 
targeted quantitation of commonly used/ abused drugs and qualitative detection 
of a larger range of drugs. This qualitative detection is accomplished using a 
triggered MRM method and a spectral database. To validate this method, 
deidentified, remnant urine samples were spiked with a variety of uncommonly 
encountered illicit drugs including various spice derivatives, bath salts, and 
fentanyl derivatives. The performance of the method was evaluated based on its 
ability to perform accurate quantitation of targeted compounds and its ability 
to qualitatively detect the presence of the spiked drugs. The method 
demonstrated excellence performance. The success of this method suggests such an 
approach could find widespread use in clinical laboratories; however, questions 
remain with regards to the regulatory requirements (quality control, proficiency 
testing, etc). Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 
1 .Describe the advantages and limitations of triple quadruple mass 
spectrometers, 2. Discuss the advantage of screening for a wide array of illicit 
drugs, 3.Summarize how a triggered MRM method might add value to a urine drug 
assay. [22] Advances in the assessment of Orexin-A (hypocretin-1) deficiency in 
the diagnosis of Type 1 Narcolepsy. Joshua Bornhorst, Bethany Larson, and Alicia 
Algeciras-Schimnich, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN This presentation will describe 
the clinical performance s of an assay for orexin-A (also known as 
hypocretin-1), which is a neuropeptide involved in the sleep/wake cycle. 
Impairment of orexin-A production and orexin-A modulated neurotransmission is 
associated with narcolepsy with cataplexy (episodes of muscle weakness in 
response to emotional stimuli), and deficiency of orexin-A in cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) is a hallmark of type 1 narcolepsy. The diagnostic criteria for type 
1 narcolepsy in the third edition of the International Classification of Sleep 
Disorders (2014) includes the presence of cataplexy and/ or measured CSF orexin 
concentrations less than or equal to 110 pg/mL. However, clinical testing for 
orexin-A in CSF had been unavailable in the United States. A competitive 
radioimmunoassay for orexin-A quantitation in CSF was characterized for clinical 
use in the diagnosis of type 1 narcolepsy. This assay demonstrates acceptable 
analytical precision, accuracy, and stability. To evaluate clinical performance, 
100 residual CSF specimens from individuals without suspicion of type 1 
narcolepsy all exhibited orexin-A concentrations of >200 pg/mL (mean: 531pg/mL). 
Additionally, samples from 20 patients with clinical suspicion of type 1 
narcolepsy were evaluated. All nine confirmed 9 type 1 narcolepsy patients 
exhibited orexin concentrations of <50 pg/mL. All 11 patients that were 
subsequently deemed to have hypersomnias other than type 1 narcolepsy had orexin 
concentrations of >200pg/mL (range 352-600 pg/mL). Clinical introduction of this 
test fulfilled a pressing diagnostic need for differentiation of type 1 
narcolepsy from other causes of hypersomnolence. Emerging information on how 
this assay compares to other methods of patient assessment for potential type 1 
narcolepsy will also be discussed. Upon completion of this activity, 
participants should be able to identify the role of orexin deficiency in type 1 
narcolepsy as well as recommend appropriate testing for the evaluation of 
individuals who potential have this disorder. [23] Zika outbreak in Dominican 
Republic 2016: A review. Frederick L. Kiechle1, Angelica Freddo1, and Henry 
Quezada2. 1Pompano Beach, FL and 2Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic We mined the 
data in the Biorepository at Boca Biolistics obtained during the Zika outbreak 
for symptomatic pregnant (PG) and non-pregnant (NP) women in the Dominican 
Republic in 2016. Zika virus (ZIKV) is a Flavivirus transmitted in humans by 
Aedes mosquitoes. There was a biphasic distribution of 305 symptomatic (NP) and 
65 (PG) women (266 NAAT positive by Hologic, Aptima ZIKV assay) in April and 
late May/June 2016. To determine previous exposure to dengue (DENV) infection, 
anti-DENV IgG was measured in serum or plasma by ELISA (Euroimmun). (Science 
2019; 363: 307). In 65 symptomatic PG women the outcome was 4.6 % spontaneous 
abortion, 2 % fetal demise and 4.6 % other. We evaluated the presence of 6 
presenting symptoms and 3 lab tests (Aptima ZIKA assay; EUROIMMUN ELISA IgG; CDC 
MAC-ELISA ZiKV IgM - performed by FL Dept of Health) over 8 time intervals (12 - 
36 repeat PG or NP patients per interval; total PR 131, total NP 171). The 
prevalence of 4 symptoms were less frequent in PG women vs NP, including fever, 
severe eye pain, head pain and joint and muscle pain. Conjunctivitis occurred 
more frequently in PG vs NP and rash had an equal occurrence. ZIKV IgG and 
MAC-ELISA-IgM were positive with similar frequency in both groups 1 through 8. 
NAAT ZIKV results were positive for all 8 intervals (87.5% to 72.2%) in PG 
patients and in NP (52% in interval 1 and 0.0 to 4.0% in intervals 2 to 8). PG 
patients with rash were 98% positive for DENV IgG. In conclusion, NP and PG 
women exhibited a biphasic spike of ZIKV positive infections; from 0 to 86 days 
post symptoms, PG exhibited a lower prevalence of fever, head pain, severe eye 
pain and joint and muscle pain compared to NP ZIKV symptomatic patients. The 
results suggest that PG provides protection from clinical symptoms compared to 
NP during infection cycle in spite of persistent viremia in PG vs NP. Upon 
completion of this activity, participants should be able to describe the 
clinical and laboratory findings in Zika infection and differences in PG and NP 
patient presentation. [24] Rapidly evolving and fatal miliary tuberculosis and 
COVID-19 infection inan infant.Anindita Ghosh1,Amanda Tchakarov1, Norma Perez1, 
Nina Tatevian2, Meenakshi Bhattacharjee1. 1University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX, and 2Women and Infant Hospital of Rhode Island, 
Providence, RI Background: Tuberculosis (TB) and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) are two 
important infectious diseases causing morbidity and mortality worldwide. Active 
TB infection can stimulate host immune responses and together with COVID-19, may 
lead to cytokine storm and immune dysregulation leading to multi-organ failure. 
Studies have reported flare up of pulmonary TB after SARS-CoV-2 infection in 
adults. We present a unique case of both miliary tuberculosis and SARS-CoV-2 
coinfection in an infant, indicating that children can acquire both infections 
concurrently, and have rapid progression with fatal outcome. Case: Our patient 
was a 6-month-old previously healthy term boy. He had persistent cough and 
congestion, became severely ill, and was brought to emergency department. Chest 
X-ray showed diffuse alveolar and interstitial airspace opacities. He was found 
to be COVID-19 positive by PCR test. Laboratory studies showed pancytopenia with 
left shift, elevated transaminases (ALT 77, AST 313), low albumin, elevated 
inflammatory markers (CRP 103, IL-6 19000), and abnormal coagulation profile 
with coagulopathy and disseminated intravascular coagulation. He developed 
strokes, severe sepsis and electrolyte abnormalities, and declined rapidly with 
death within 6 days. Autopsy examination showed hepatosplenomegaly. His lungs, 
liver, kidneys, and spleen showed multifocal micro-abscesses, which on 
microscopic examination showed necrotic foci teeming with mycobacteria, and were 
culture positive for M. tuberculosis, i.e. miliary tuberculosis. 
Neuropathological examination showed infarction in the right middle and 
posterior cerebral artery territories. Conclusions: This patient helps 
illuminate some immunological and pathological aspects of two co-occurring 
infectious diseases and the susceptibility for development of fatal 
complications with SARS-CoV-2 infection in the pediatric population. Upon 
completion this activity the learner will be able to: 1. recognition of COVID-19 
(SARS-CoV-2) infection cooccurrence with another infectious disease in children. 
2. challenges in treatment of COVID-19 infection with other/associated 
infectious disease. 3. recognition of the complexity of pathological processes 
in childhood infectious disease. [25] A Postulated Cross Talk between Insulin 
Growth Factor Binding Protein 3 (IGFBP-3) and IGFBP-7 May Suggest a Critical 
Role in Carcinogenesis. Fan Shen1 and Consolato M. Sergi1,2. 1Department of 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada 
and 2Anatomic Pathology Division, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, 
University of Ottawa, ON, Canada Objective: The insulin/insulin-like growth 
factors (IGFs) have crucial tasks in the growth, differentiation, and 
proliferation of healthy and pernicious cells. They are involved in coordinated 
complexes, including receptors, ligands, binding proteins, and proteases. 
However, the systems can become dysregulated in tumorigenesis. Insulinlike 
growth factor-binding protein 7 (IGFBP7) is a protein belonging to the IGFBP 
superfamily. We intended to explore the cross-talk between IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-7. 
Methods: Analysis of text/ data mining tools using the NCBI platform was used. 
Results: Numerous studies have provided evidence that IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-7 are 
involved in a variety of cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
breast cancer, gastroesophageal cancer, colon cancer, prostate cancer, among 
many others. Still, very few suggest an interaction between these two molecules. 
We found that both proteins share some crucial signaling pathways. P53, and 
growth inhibitory agents, including retinoic acid (RA), transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-β), and anti-estrogens, can give rise to increased expression 
of IGFBP-3. IGFBP-7 can regulate the growth-suppressing effects of the TGF-β 
superfamily, and similarly the expression of IGFBP-7 can be upregulated by 
cellular treatment with TGF-β1 and RA. Conclusions: A comprehensive overview of 
the relationship between IGFBP-3, IGFBP-7, and cancer highlighted the IGFBP-3 
crosstalk with IGFBP-7, which may suggest a promotion other than initiation in 
carcinogenesis. Upon completion of this learning activity participants should be 
able to: 1. to define to role of Insulin Growth Factor Binding Protein 
superfamily in carcinogenesis 2. to compare the respective role of IGFBP-3 and 
IGFBP7 in cancer 3. to determine the relevance of a cross talk between IGFBP-3 
and IGFBP-7 for carcinogenesis [26] Measure Directly, Treat Efficiently. 
Critical Bleeding Management at the Speed of Sound. Oksana Volod, Cedars Sinai, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA Viscoelastic Testing (VET) is a category of functional 
whole blood tests used to assay hemostatic competence and optimize blood product 
transfusions in patients during or after surgical procedures where acute 
bleeding may occur. Efficient use of these tests has become an elevated need for 
a comprehensive patient blood management program. Cup and pin legacy systems and 
those that display the traditional interpretation "curves", such as with 
thromboelastography (TEG®) and rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM®), require 
varying levels of oversight to maintain compliance and optimal efficient 
clinical use. Over the last decade, advances have been made with the integration 
of cartridge-based VET systems to improve upon those legacy systems. During this 
presentation, the legacy and new generation VETs available in the US are 
compared based on their unique hemostatic parameters that define contributions 
of coagulation factors, fibrinogen/fibrin, platelets, and clot lysis as related 
to the lifespan of a clot. The balance between the needs to act on relevant 
critical data in near real-time and compliance with the laboratory that must 
ensure quality is also discussed. The Quantra® system is the newest VET. It is a 
fully sealed, cartridgebased, automated, four-channel device that provides the 
fastest hemostasis assessment (12 minutes on average). The Quantra is based on a 
new ultrasound technology termed sonic estimation of elasticity via resonance 
(SEER). The important differences between Quantra and other VETs are its ease of 
interpretation, optimizations for use at the point of patient need, and its 
ability to directly measure blood viscoelastic properties. Through real case 
examples, this talk will also focus on Quantra specific hemostasis alterations 
and optimal management strategies for bleeding patients. Upon completion of this 
learning activity participants should be able to: 1. Describe Viscoelastic 
Testing as part of a Patient Blood Management initiative. 2. Categorize various 
viscoelastic assay methods and classify clinical and operational needs related 
to implementation and accessibility (i.e., speed, ease of use and location) 3. 
Interpret and explain the results of Quantra via participation in real-world 
case example. [27] Managing the challenges of running a transfusion service 
during the COVID-19 pandemic Claire Meena-Leist, Amanda Riggs and Mohamed 
Elkady, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY Hospitals 
have developed systems to adjust to periodic blood product shortages. Apheresis 
platelets and group O Rh(D) negative red blood cell shortages are common during 
summer months and holidays and can be managed well by having a strong blood 
management program and obtaining contracts with secondary blood suppliers. The 
COVID-19 pandemic, however, caused historic blood product shortages that 
resulted in red blood cell rationing and requests from our primary blood 
supplier for hospitals to consider canceling non-urgent surgical procedures. 
With virtually no lead time, in December 2021, our blood supplier began 
rationing all group O red blood cells to their customers. For the first time 
blood was allotted to customers based on blood center supply, not patient need. 
The rationing quickly expanded to include all group A and B red blood cells, 
with no information about how long the shortage would last. Hospitals were 
forced to develop more creative blood management methods, and to develop 
criteria for surgery cancellations. We discuss our experience with providing 
patient care in a hospital system that includes the region's only American 
College of Surgeons (ACS) Verified Level 1 Trauma centers for adults in the 
Commonwealth of KY. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to 1. Describe how one hospital system approached blood management during a 
historic blood shortage 2. Explain why hospital blood management is not the sole 
answer to providing patient care during extreme blood shortages 3. Identify ways 
that blood centers can improve strategic planning for the next pandemic. [28] 
Cells,wells, & spells: the evolution of HLA testing methods. Tiffany K Bratton, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY Organ transplantation is a life-saving 
treatment modality for patients with end stage organ failure. However, allograft 
rejection remains an obstacle for long term outcomes. An evolution in the 
understanding of transplant immunology over the past fifty years has led to 
continuous development and improvement of methods for detecting, not only HLA 
antibodies, but also other markers of the overall immune status of transplant 
patients. HLA testing began in the 1960's with donor cells; the cytotoxic 
crossmatch caused a paradigm shift in transplantation with immediate 
improvements in short term outcomes. In the early 2000's the organ allocation 
system was radically changed by the development of solid phase technology. This 
presentation will cover the evolution of HLA testing methods from the very 
beginning to current state as well as speculation on new technologies that could 
be developed and used to continue to improve long term outcomes for transplant 
patients. Upon completion of this learning activity participants should be able 
to: 1. Describe the different testing methods used for detection of HLA 
sensitization. 2. Identify the current HLA testing methods. 3. Evaluate new 
technologies that may be developed for both HLA and overall transplant testing. 
[29] The CNS-penetrating taxane drug TPI 287 potentiates the antiglioma activity 
of the AURKA inhibitor alisertib in vivo. Müge Sak, Brian J. Williams, Cory T. 
Zumbar, Mustafa N. G. Al-Kawaaz, Aastha Kakar, Andrew J. Hey, Leslie M. Scheir, 
Landon Teer, Joseph Chen and Norman L. Lehman. University of Louisville, 
Louisville KY Glioblastoma, IDH wildtype (GBM) is the most common malignant 
primary brain tumor in adults and has a poor prognosis. We previously found 
cytotoxic synergy between the AURKA inhibitor alisertib and the novel 
CNS-penetrating taxane TPI 287 against GBM tumor stem-like cells in vitro. Here 
we used an orthotopic human GBM xenograft mouse model to test the ability of TPI 
287 to potentiate alisertib's antitumor activity in vivo. At two weeks, animal 
tumor volume was significantly decreased by alisertib, TPI 287, and combination 
treatments compared to controls. At four weeks both alisertib and TPI 287 groups 
had reduced tumor volume and a statistically significant decrease was again 
observed in the combination therapy group. Alisertib monotherapy improved animal 
survival, which was further improved with the addition of TPI 287 (p=0.0058). 
TPI 287 alone did not significantly improve animal survival. We also 
investigated the mechanism of apoptotic synergy between alisertib and TPI 287. 
Alisertib + TPI 287 combination treatment decreased Bcl-2 levels in vivo and in 
vitro. In contrast, this treatment increased expression of pro-apoptotic 
proteins Bim and Bak in synchronized GBM cells. Bim knockdown by siRNA inhibited 
synergistic cytotoxicity caused by alisertib + TPI 287 (p=0.0042). These results 
suggest that these drugs cause synergistic apoptosis in GBM cells partially 
through effects on Bcl-2 family proteins. Additionally, both alisertib and TPI 
287 significantly reduced GBM cell invasion (p<0.0001). However, this effect was 
greater with TPI 287, and the drug combination was no more effective at 
inhibiting invasion than TPI 287 alone. These findings support the potential use 
of this combination therapy against GBM in clinical trials. Upon completion of 
this activity, participants should be able to understand the Bcl-2 family 
protein apoptotic cascade, the mechanism of action of taxanes and AURKA 
inhibitors and the rationale for combination treatment for GBM. [30] SARS-CoV-2 
antibody testing in the post-vaccine era: comparing assays for standardization. 
Sarrah Lahorewala and Xin Yi, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX The 
interpretation of results of various SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests is challenging 
due to non-standardization among assays. The aims of this study were: to compare 
three commonly used semi-quantitative/quantitative SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests 
with our institutional Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Spike ELISA assay; and, to validate the 
ELISA assay against known National Standard (CRM-NIBSC21/234), thus correlating 
calculated ELISA concentrations (U/ mL) and the international standard units for 
binding assay formats, i.e. Binding Antibody Units/mL (BAU/ mL). The 
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Spike ELISA assay detects IgG antibodies against the viral 
anti-S Ectodomain. The three commercial tests compared to the ELISA assay were 
the Roche Elecsys® Anti-SARS-CoV-2S (U/mL), Siemens Atellica COV2G (Index) and 
VITROS Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG Quantitative (BAU/mL). The Roche and Siemens test 
comparisons included 95 patient samples, with 51 samples evaluated for the 
VITROS assay. Statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism9 
software. We mapped the antibody concentrations obtained on the ELISA assay 
against that of CRM-NIBSC21/234 and validated their linear relationship. The 
commercial assays evaluated showed good correlation with the Anti-SARS-CoV-2 
Spike ELISA, across all ELISA titers. The corresponding assay result ranges 
(lower and upper 95% CI of mean) for each titer group is as follows: <1:50: 
Roche: <0.4-<0.4; Siemens: 0.0070.020; Vitros: 1.854-4.606; 1:50: Roche: 
26.01-88.39; Siemens: 0.585-0.966; Vitros: 33.47-50.83; 1:150: Roche: 
622.9-1095; Siemens: 6.82-214.38; Vitros: 52.35-141.4; 1:450: Roche: 1321-2091; 
Siemens: 16.74-19.55; Vitros: 112.4-192.2; 1:1350: Roche: 2067->2500; Siemens: 
>20->20; Vitros: >200->200. The calculated concentration (U/mL) obtained by the 
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Spike ELISA and the expected concentration of CRM were strongly 
correlated and results were found to be linear in the range from 3.25-832 BAU/mL 
covering titers ranging from <1:50 to >1:1350. The calibration of our ELISA 
assay to the International Standard, and its correlation with commercial assays, 
allows for standardization between assays and a better understanding of the 
various antibody titers in the context of immune protection against SARS-CoV-2. 
Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 1. Describe 
the clinical utility of antibody testing in SARS-CoV-2 2. Understand the various 
kinds of SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests commonly utilized 3. Interpret results of 
commonly used semi-quantitative/quantitative assays and correlate assay titers 
with the International Standard Units (BAU/ mL). [31] How to be a better 
surgical pathology consultant. Neda Zarrin-Khameh, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX Consultation on surgical pathology specimens is part of the daily 
professional practice of every pathologist. We evaluated the characteristics of 
a good consultant and the habits that should be avoided. A 1-page questionnaire 
was prepared to evaluate how pathologists select their consultants. The 
questionnaire was emailed to 106 pathologists. Fifty-eight pathologists 
completed the questionnaire (55% response rate). The most important criteria for 
a consultant were knowledge and expertise. Accessibility, turnaround time, and 
teaching (providing explanation about the case) were selected next for choosing 
a consultant. The 2 factors that contributed to avoiding a consultant were 
expensive workup and changing the diagnosis. Open questions about "definition of 
best/worst consultant," "when to change the consultant," and "if the criteria 
for consultant have changed over time" provided additional valuable information. 
Accessibility, short turnaround time, and teaching are the most important 
reasons for selecting a consultant. Performing an expensive workup and being in 
the habit of changing the diagnosis are the factors that make a consultant less 
favorable. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to: 1. 
recognize three characteristics of a consultant that are important for 
requesting consultation, 2. identify three characteristics that are not 
recommended for a consultant and 3. determine when a pathologists may decide to 
change their consultant. [32] The Diagnostic Role of Fusion-Gene Analysis in 
Ambiguous Soft Tissue Sarcomas. Haider A. Mejbel, Alexander C. Mackinnon, and 
Shuko Harada, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, 
Birmingham, The diagnosis of soft tissue sarcoma often requires adequate 
clinicopathologic correlation as well as the appropriate application of 
immunohistochemical studies. However, certain ambiguous/undifferentiated soft 
tissue sarcomas can pose a diagnostic challenge. We retrospectively reviewed the 
cases submitted for RNA-based fusion panel (Archer FusionPlex assay) to evaluate 
the diagnostic utility of fusion gene analysis in soft tissue sarcomas. Herein 
we present the clinicopathologic and molecular alterations of three challenging 
soft tissue sarcomas, on which, the application of fusion-gene analysis has 
entirely altered the initial diagnosis. These cases include Ewing sarcoma, Ewing 
sarcoma with melanocytic differentiation, and MEIS1::NOCA1 sarcoma that were 
initially diagnosed as carcinoid tumor of the lung, melanoma, and low grade 
endometrial stromal sarcoma, respectively. In addition to providing the valuable 
prognostic information, the application of fusion-gene analysis has resulted in 
the reclassification of these neoplasms and altered the type of therapy. 
Currently, all patients are alive at the 6-, 26-, and 4-month of their final 
diagnosis. In conclusion, although adequate histopathologic examination and 
extensive immunohistochemical study were performed, the final diagnoses and 
classification of these sarcomas were only rendered after the application of the 
appropriate molecular testing. Upon completion of this activity, participants 
should be able to understand the role of molecular fusiongene analysis in 
further classifying ambiguous soft tissue sarcomas that can help arrive at the 
accurate diagnosis, alter disease stage, and inform therapy. [33] Distinct 
lesions of host defense and bacterial offense in tuberculosis. Robert L. Hunter 
and Robert E. Brown, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX The 
continued existence of M. tuberculosis depends on production of two distinct 
disease processes in humans. Primary tuberculosis (TB), the host's defense, 
protects against disseminated infection. Post-primary TB, in contrast, is the 
bacteria's offense. It facilitates transmission of infection to new hosts. Host 
defense is mediated by granulomas as are widely studied in human TB and animal 
models. People may succumb to lack of defense with disseminated infection, but 
this does not benefit the organism since it also dies. Bacterial offense, the 
lesions that mediate transmission of infection to new hosts, is mediated by 
post-primary TB. It begins as a subclinical obstructive lobular pneumonia that 
slowly accumulates materials for a sudden massive necrotizing pneumonia that can 
be coughed out to produce a cavity from which the organism can escape to infect 
new people. The early lesions of post-primary TB were well known to 
investigators in the preantibiotic era when autopsies were cutting edge science, 
but are unknown to the majority of current investigators who study only animal 
models. While modern technologies are making unprecedented progress in 
understanding tuberculous granulomas, they are making very little in 
understanding post-primary TB that does not exist in most animal models. 
Fortunately, new multiplex technologies make it possible to study human FFPE 
slides with great depth and precision. Such studies are necessary to gain a 
better understanding to the key developmental stage of TB. Upon completion of 
the activity, participants should be able to recognize and describe the 
differences between primary and post-primary TB. [34] Agonal-stress vesicles in 
critically ill children confused with microvesicular steatosis. John Hicks, 
Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX Background: Acute or 
prolonged systemic organ failure, perinatal demise, or unexpected death in the 
neonates and children raises a concern for metabolic, lysosomal storage or 
mitochondrial diseases and infectious etiologies. A potential pitfall is the 
presence of cytoplasmic vacuoles particularly within hepatocytes that appear as 
microvesicular steatosis on routine staining. Microvesicular and macrovesicular 
steatosis may indicate lipid metabolic or mitochondrial disorders. 
Ultrastructural examination (EM) is useful in identifying abnormal lipid 
accumulation, mitochondrial structural abnormalities, and metabolic and 
lysosomal storage diseases. Particular structures indicative of post-mortem 
agonal or pre-mortem stress have been termed agonal-stress vesicles. It has not 
been shown, that these agonal-stress vesicles contain acute phase reactants in 
response to cellular ischemic or asphyxia. Design: EM laboratory archives were 
searched for cases with vesicles fitting the ultrastructural features of 
agonal-stress vesicles. 40 cases (20 males; 20 females) were identified with 
liver tissue submitted for routine processing (paraffin-embedded formalin fixed) 
and EM. Study population had variety of medical conditions associated with 
ischemic and asphyxial stress. Immunohistochemical staining (IHC) with acute 
phase reactant antibodies was performed (c-reactive protein, fibrinogen, 
alpha-2-macroglobulin, alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-1-chymotrypsin). Results: All 
routinely stained liver tissue sections shows variably-sized vacuoles within 
hepatocyte cytoplasm, mimicking microvesicular steatosis. IHC for acute phase 
reactants highlighted the vacuoles with all antibodies (c-reactive protein, 
fibrinogen, alpha-2-macroglobulin, alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-1-chymotrypsin), 
with greatest intensity with alpha-1-antitrypsin and alpha-1-chymotrypsin. EM 
showed frequent vesicles with limiting membranes, containing finely granular, 
homogeneous content. Conclusion: Agonal-stress vesicles are under recognized 
structure and may be interpreted as microvesicular steatosis, leading to a 
workup for metabolic or mitochondrial disease. EM assists in identifying these 
structures as agonal-stress vesicles. Also, residual formalin-fixed, frozen 
tissue and tissue recovered from paraffin tissue blocks may be utilized for EM. 
IHC for acute phase reactants in this study confirms the contents of 
agonal-stress vacuoles being acute phase reactants. Upon completion of this 
activity, participants should be able to describe the histopathologic, 
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural features of agonal-stress vacuoles. [35] 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM): A Tool often Underused for Pediatric 
Small Round Blue Cell Tumors opening New Venues for Single-Cell Technologies. 
Consolato M. Sergi1,2, 1Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, and 2Anatomic Pathology Division, 
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada Aims: 
Pediatric small round blue cell tumors (PSRBCT) are an intriguing and 
challenging collection of neoplasms. Light microscopy of small round blue cell 
tumors identifies small round cells. Pediatric small round blue cell tumors 
include several entities, such as nephroblastoma, neuroblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, retinoblastoma, malignant lymphoma, and small 
cell osteosarcoma among others. The differential diagnosis of these neoplasms 
may be controversial at a light microscopy level, even using 
immunohistochemistry. A faint staining or an ambiguous background can deter 
pathologists from making the proper diagnostic decision. Methods: A review of 
the personal experience at four centers is considered here. In addition, single 
cell technologies are added to renew the interest of TEM. Results: Molecular 
biology may provide an overwhelming amount of data challenging to distinguish 
them, and some translocations may be seen in more than one category. Thus, TEM 
can be extremely valuable. In particular, tumor cells associated with tangles of 
cytoplasmic processes containing neurosecretory granules can diagnose 
neuroblastoma. Conversely, a marked variation in size, shape and cytoplasmic 
differentiation with most tumor cells containing prominent dilated cisterns of 
rough endoplasmic reticulum and bundles of thick and thin filaments with 
well-formed Z-bands may infer the diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma. The presence of 
an intracytoplasmic deposit of glycogen may suggest Ewing's sarcoma. At the same 
time, a cellular arrangement in a tubular configuration with a well-formed basal 
lamina may advocate the diagnosis of nephroblastoma. Single-cell sequencing are 
booming. Conclusion: Single-cell sequencing technologies are useful to discover 
the genome, transcriptome, metabolome, and epigenome of single cells. These 
techniques can show the differences and evolutionary relationships of 
innumerable cells. Here, we speculate that TEM may have an intriguing role for 
single-cell sequencing technologies and their applications in oncology, 
microbiology, reproductive and environmental sciences emphasizing the essential 
role that single-cell sequencing methods play in these areas. Upon completion of 
this activity, participants should be able to: 1. To define to general role of 
TEM in pathology. 2. To identify the role of TEM for PSRBCTs. 3. To determine 
the relevance in applying new technologies to TEM studies. [36] Chondroid 
Chordoma Presenting as Oropharyngeal Mass in Pediatrics. John Hicks, Texas 
Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX Introduction: 
Chordoma is a low to intermediate grade malignancy, resembling embryonal 
notochord. This tumor occurs in sacrococcygeal (60%), craniocervical (25%, 
clivus most common) and vertebral (15%) sites. Chordoma is a rare tumor 
(incidence 5/10,000,000; 2% of bone tumors). Peak incidence is in 4th decade. 
Clinical Presentation and Pathology Findings: 8 year-old girl with asthma 
history presented with 6-12 months of progressively worsening snoring, muffled 
voice and saliva pooling, attributed to seasonal allergies. Upon oral 
examination, a firm, protruding right tonsillar bed (oropharyngeal) mass with 
intact overlying vascularized mucosa was noted. Limited CT imaging identified an 
oropharyngeal mass with bony destruction. Biopsy was performed which showed a 
hyalinized chondroid to cartilaginous mass. Tumor cells immunoreacted with 
brachyury, EMA, S100 and SOX9, while negative for D2-40, with retained nuclear 
INI-1. Low-grade chondroid chordoma diagnosis was rendered. Molecular tumor 
testing identified p53 mutation, and KMT2B and ROS1 mutations of unknown 
significance. Conventional tumor karyotype was 46,XX. Germline testing was 
negative for p53 mutation. Additional imaging identified an 8.5 cm clivus origin 
tumor. The patient underwent additional surgery for tumor debulking, followed by 
oncologic (radiationtherapy) management. Conclusion: Chondroid chordoma 
involving oro/nasopharyngeal region is rare (0.2% of oro/nasopharyngeal tumors). 
Differential diagnosis includes chondrosarcoma, chordoid meningioma, 
myoepithelioma/myoepithelial carcinoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, and 
chordoid meningioma. Treatment is surgical, with complete resection difficult 
due to anatomic location. Although the tumor tends to be radioresistant, 
high-dose radiation therapy is usuallyemployed. Overall survival with aggressive 
surgery is up to 75% at 5yrs and up to 65% at 10yrs. Recurrence is common (up to 
90% at 10 years). Chondroid variant has somewhat better prognosis. Sonic 
hedgehog homolog protein gene (7q33), T (brachyury) gene duplication (6q27), and 
TSC1 or TSC2 (tuberous sclerosis) gene inactivation are associated with 
chordoma. Autosomal dominant familial tumors associated with T gene duplication 
are rare. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to 
describe the clinical, radiologic histopathologic, immunohistochemistry and 
molecular features in the diagnosis of chordoma. [37] Deciduosis adjacent an 
ileouterine fistula in the setting of Crohn's disease: Case report and 
literature review. Lance Truong1, Yigit Baykara1, and Nina Tatevian2. 1Rhode 
Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, 
RI and 2Women & Infants Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI Deciduosis is a rare diagnosis which refers to 
extrauterine decidual tissue, found usually in adjacent gynecological structures 
including the cervix and ovaries, and more rarely in the peritoneum and in other 
abdominal organs. Fistulas are a known and frequent complication of Crohn's 
disease, commonly involving adjacent bowel and rarely involving gynecological 
structures. Here, we report a case of deciduosis of the distal ileum occurring 
in the setting of long-standing Crohn's disease in a 34-year-old patient at 31 
5/7 weeks of gestation, admitted to our hospital with acute right lower quadrant 
pain. Imaging was suggestive of complex fistulae and abscess formation. She 
underwent a cesarean delivery followed by hysterectomy and ileocolectomy with an 
ileouterine fistula tract leading to a complex subserosal uterine abscess on 
intraoperative and pathological gross examination. On histological examination, 
a focus of ectopic decidua adjacent the fistula was incidentally found on H&E 
section. Review of the current literature on gastrointestinal deciduosis 
identified nine publications reporting cases primarily involving the appendix 
and only a single previously reported case involving the ileum. Crohn's disease 
cases with reported ileouterine fistulas are extremely rare, with only four 
previously reported cases in the literature. The utility in recognizing this 
extremely rare presentation is in avoiding misinterpreting this entity as a 
neoplastic process. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to 1. define deciduosis, 2. recognize complications associated with Crohn's 
disease, 3. compare neoplastic mimickers of ectopic decidual tissue [38] Modern 
implementation of Digital Pathology with Artificial Intelligence in an Academic 
Medical Center. Dibson Dibe Gondim, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine at University of Louisville, KY Digital pathology refers to the digital 
transformation of histopathology - turning histologic tissue sections into 
multi-gigabyte whole slide images. These images can be evaluated by quantitative 
and reproducible computational techniques, including artificial 
intelligence-based algorithms. While the value of this technology has been 
increasingly recognized, clinical adoption has been limited in most of the 
world, including in the United States. Our academic center and health care 
system have embraced the concept of digital pathology and artificial 
intelligence. My goal is to present the digital pathology implementation 
proposal and discuss our progress. Overall, digital pathology implementation 
tends to be a slow process occurring over years. However, we decided that the 
technology was mature enough for an accelerated adoption plan. From the 
beginning, we focused on 100% prospective glass slide scanning 100%, in contrast 
with most institutions which start with limited retrospective scanning. To 
achieve this, we created a multidisciplinary team with expertise in pathology, 
histotechnology, project management, software engineering, and data science. We 
integrated scanning in the histology laboratory using LEAN principles and 
updated our staining equipment to allow compatibility with the slide scanners. 
We installed high-throughput slide scanners that require minimal user experience 
or training. We adopted cloud-based software as the platform product from a 
vendor with expertise in artificial intelligence. This software platform 
provides image viewer, worklist, storage, and artificial intelligence-based 
algorithms. Cloud storage allowed us to scale our operation without major 
overhead. We started scanning 100% of slides in less than 9 months after the 
beginning of the project. We deployed the integration interface and the first 
FDA-approved artificial intelligence-based tool in the testing environment 
within months. Our experience shows that the current technologies allow for an 
accelerated adoption of digital pathology. However, advanced understanding of 
digital pathology technologies and assembling a multidisciplinary task force 
have been instrumental in determining how to best put together all the pieces 
and to overcome multiple challenges that emerged during the implementation 
period. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to 1. 
understand how digital pathology fits in the clinical workflow, 2. describe 
digital pathology implementation strategies, and 3. explain how integration of 
multiple hospital and laboratory information systems for a productive user 
experience. [39] Establishing a Hospital AI Committee: Enhancing Precision 
Medicine. Andrew A. Borkowski, M.D. James A. Haley Veterans' Hospital James A. 
Haley Veterans' Hospital AI Committee was established in May 2021. Vision: To 
improve outcomes and experiences for our Veterans by developing trustworthy 
Artificial Intelligence capabilities to support the Department of Veterans 
Affairs mission. Mission: To build robust capacity in Artificial Intelligence to 
develop and apply innovative AI solutions and transform the VA by facilitating a 
learning environment that supports the delivery of world-class benefits and 
services to our veterans. Accomplishments: Establishment of the AI email group, 
MS Teams AI Group, and SharePoint site. AI Ethics Guidelines. Clinical AI 
Product Evaluation Guidelines. Education programs with "AI Article of the Week", 
AI Newsletter, and AI Conference. Collaboration with the National AI Institute. 
Partnership with the Moffitt Machine Learning League. AI in Healthcare Workshop 
during the 2021 VISN 8 Improvement and Innovation Forum. 2022 VISN 8 AI 
Conference Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to 
familiarize themselves with the formal process of promoting AI throughout their 
institutions. [40] Artificial Intelligence in Radiology: Hype, Hope, or 
Hysteria.Narayan Viswanadhan, Chief of Radiology at the Tampa VA, and is a 
clinical faculty at USF Health Morsani College of Medicine. Tampa, FL There is 
particularly increasing application of AI tools within Diagnostic Imaging and 
Pathology. Clinical applications of AI in imaging will be discussed, with focus 
on current uses, and future directions. Additional areas covered will be 
utilization of AI in Neuroimaging, population health, Breast Imaging, and 
Precision Medicine. Utilization of AI in the face of the pandemic will also be 
discussed.. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be able to 1. 
develop an understanding of Artificial Intelligence as it relates to imaging 
2.understand current clinical use cases and future directions, and 3. appreciate 
challenges of AI in Radiology. [41] Data literacy in healthcare: a vital 
component of precision medicine. Joyce J. Ou, Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, RI The accelerating volume of heterogenous, multimodal 
data that is generated in modern healthcare highlights an urgent need for data 
literacy across a broad range of stakeholders. As information sources, 
analytics, and use cases rapidly evolve, data-powered augmented intelligence is 
becoming a major driver of precision medicine. The growing influence of machine 
generated insights on decisionmaking underscores the importance of ensuring that 
health data producers and consumers have the skills to critically evaluate, 
interpret, communicate, and act on these insights. Data literacy has, at times, 
been equated with specific data science tools and processes. However, fluency 
with data in the current era requires additional knowledge of its value and 
limitations with respect to data life cycles and governance, along with 
technical, social, and ethical implications. To achieve this breadth of 
understanding, a practical framework can be developed to identify and address 
gaps in data literacy. This framework focuses on identifying core categories of 
data skills, assessing stakeholder roles and needs relative to these categories, 
and developing processes for continuous learning. Implementation of such a model 
can promote systemic innovation by enabling individuals to stay current with the 
pace of technological changes that impact all stages of precision medicine 
discovery and delivery. Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to 1. Identify core competencies needed to achieve healthcare data literacy 
2. Evaluate the impact of a data literacy framework on promoting collaborations 
between data producers and consumers in precision medicine 3. Describe a data 
education model that supports continuous learning for healthcare stakeholders. 
[42] Digital health applications and key characteristics related to at-home 
testing outcomes. Lee B. Springer, Brio Systems, Bellevue, OH Digital health 
technology applications (DHT) have been minimally utilized to support at-home 
rapid testing in the past. With the emergence of SARS-CoV-2, their use has 
increased significantly. One of the primary contributors to this growth is the 
widespread adoption of at-home testing throughout the progression of the 
pandemic to increase the publics access to testing. Given the increased need for 
at-home testing, digital health technology applications have been utilized to 
aid users throughout all testing processes and efficiently document results. 
These applications are considered to play a vital role in ensuring optimal 
accuracy of the test device and facilitate public health reporting. A 
step-by-step systematic analysis of digital health technology supporting at-home 
point-of-care testing was performed to identify key areas of task related 
dependence to predicted outcome in relation to technological support. The aim of 
the analysis was to assess the quality and features in relation to engagement 
during testing phases utilizing the mobile application rating scale (MARS). This 
analysis included 27 digital health applications designed to complement at-home 
testing for glucose, creatinine, coagulation, hemoglobin A1c, and SARS-CoV-2 
with more than 5,000 downloads or registered users. A nonparametric rank sum 
test was used to determine correlating performance between sections of the 
mobile application rating scale and aligned testing phases. High scores in 
pre-analytical and post-analytical sections of the mobile application rating 
scale correlated to an overall high level of satisfaction and desired outcome. 
Additional correlations were seen between sections related to overall 
functionality, and applications viewed to support pre-analytical processes 
effectively, these were deemed as being able to consistently produce better 
patient and result outcomes. Upon completion of this activity, participants 
should be able to identify digital health technology that would optimize 
accurate results, predict overall patient engagement in clinical application and 
design clinical practices around digital health technology to optimize patient 
outcomes. [43] Validation of Artificial Intelligence-Based System for Prostate 
Cancer Detection and Grading. Tarymé López Díaz and Dibson Dibe Gondim, 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at University of Louisville, KY 
Paige Prostate Detect (Paige.AI Inc., New York, USA) is the first FDA-approved 
artificial intelligence (AI)-based system created to assist pathologists to 
detect and grade prostate cancer. Our goal is to present the results of a 
validation study of this system in an academic center. 40 prostate biopsy cases 
were randomly selected from a list of 60 consecutive cases. All HE-stained 
slides (619) were scanned in a Leica Aperio GT450 (400x magnification). Paige 
Prostate Detect was applied to each slide and results were compared with the 
original diagnoses. Diagnostic discrepancies were evaluated by pathologists. AI 
output was recorded for each whole slide image. On the other hand, pathologists 
provided results based on the evaluation of two or more glass slides per biopsy 
location. 36 disagreements were identified (5.8%) in all slides. Agreement on 
the case level required that all slides of a case had concordant diagnosis 
between AI-system and pathologist. 16/40 cases had disagreements. The AI-system 
helped to detect focal cancer in a case with no prior definitive cancer 
diagnosis. Multiple discrepancies related to atypical small acinar proliferation 
(ASAP) were identified. Since the system was not trained to make a diagnosis of 
ASAP, these cases were either diagnosed as carcinoma or benign. Validation of 
pathology AI-systems is essential before clinical adoption. This system shows 
potential to locate low-volume cancer in cases with no definitive diagnosis of 
malignancy. In the case of ASAP, pathologists should use well-defined criteria 
to render this diagnosis and should not rely on AI impression. [44] Respiratory 
Pathology of Acute Respiratory distress Syndrome (ARDS). Henry Oh, PhD, FACSc, 
FRSB, FAPSR, RRT, MT, CSci, Health Occupations Department, Idaho State 
University, Pocatello, ID The body's immune system response to infection is 
primarily an inflammation. Cytokines cause inflammation of tissue by making the 
cell walls of blood vessels become more permeable, thus allowing leakage of 
blood with immune cells into the surrounding tissue to start the healing process 
of the damaged tissue. The inflammation is triggered by the release of cytokines 
from interferons, interleukins, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Cells that 
release cytokines include leucocytes or interleukins, neutrophils, macrophages, 
monocytes, and many other cells. When the inflammatory response go out of 
control, it can cause more harm to the lungs in COVID-19 infection where 
cytokines can destroy normal, healthy alveoli. Cytokine storm occurs when there 
is an overwhelming inflammatory response due to the increase release of 
cytokines. The inflammatory cytokines "storms" the lungs which is the leading 
cause of mortality rates in patients with COVID-19 infection in ICU. Accumulated 
dead cells and other debris in the lungs can set the stage for the development 
of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The effects of cytokine storm 
amplify the severity and extent of ARDS. In ARDS, the alveoli become filled with 
dead cells, debris and leaked fluids from damaged interstitial cells. The lungs 
become stiff because of very low compliance. Oxygen saturation levels fall below 
90% and the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) fall below 60 mmHg which can lead 
to severe hypoxemia. Patients with ARDS develop refractory hypoxemia which is 
unresponsive to oxygen therapy. Patient needs to be intubated and connected to a 
ventilator. The positive pressure effects of mechanical ventilation may not be 
adequate to improve the oxygenation status of the patient. Positive End 
Expiratory Pressure (PEEP) would need to be added to keep the oxygen saturation 
at 90%. However, caution must be observed when ventilating patients with high 
positive pressure since this can cause detrimental effects on the cardiovascular 
system. It can decrease blood pressure, cardiac output, urine output leading to 
cardiovascular collapse, multi-organ failure, and cardiopulmonary arrest. 
Monitoring of fluids and electrolytes, vital signs, lung compliance, blood gases 
and patient's response to positive pressure ventilation are extremely important 
in critical care management. Upon completion of this activity, participants 
should be able to to briefly discuss how cytokines affect the lungs as a result 
of COVID-19 infection, to identify ventilator strategies and initial management 
of patients with ARDS, and to identify the common complications when ventilating 
patients with ARDS.

PMID: 35777803


12. Toxicol Sci. 2022 Aug 25;189(1):7-19. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfac075.

Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence in Toxicological Sciences.

Lin Z(1)(2), Chou WC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and 
Health Professions, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.
(2)Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida 32608, USA.

Machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches have revolutionized 
multiple disciplines, including toxicology. This review summarizes 
representative recent applications of machine learning and artificial 
intelligence approaches in different areas of toxicology, including 
physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling, quantitative 
structure-activity relationship modeling for toxicity prediction, adverse 
outcome pathway analysis, high-throughput screening, toxicogenomics, big data, 
and toxicological databases. By leveraging machine learning and artificial 
intelligence approaches, now it is possible to develop PBPK models for hundreds 
of chemicals efficiently, to create in silico models to predict toxicity for a 
large number of chemicals with similar accuracies compared with in vivo animal 
experiments, and to analyze a large amount of different types of data 
(toxicogenomics, high-content image data, etc.) to generate new insights into 
toxicity mechanisms rapidly, which was impossible by manual approaches in the 
past. To continue advancing the field of toxicological sciences, several 
challenges should be considered: (1) not all machine learning models are equally 
useful for a particular type of toxicology data, and thus it is important to 
test different methods to determine the optimal approach; (2) current toxicity 
prediction is mainly on bioactivity classification (yes/no), so additional 
studies are needed to predict the intensity of effect or dose-response 
relationship; (3) as more data become available, it is crucial to perform 
rigorous data quality check and develop infrastructure to store, share, analyze, 
evaluate, and manage big data; and (4) it is important to convert machine 
learning models to user-friendly interfaces to facilitate their applications by 
both computational and bench scientists.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfac075
PMID: 35861448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 Feb 15;34(2):217-239. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00316. Epub 2020 Dec 23.

Machine Learning in Predictive Toxicology: Recent Applications and Future 
Directions for Classification Models.

Wang MWH(1), Goodman JM(1), Allen TEH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, Hodgkin Building, Lancaster 
Road, Leicester LE1 7HB, United Kingdom.

In recent times, machine learning has become increasingly prominent in 
predictive toxicology as it has shifted from in vivo studies toward in silico 
studies. Currently, in vitro methods together with other computational methods 
such as quantitative structure-activity relationship modeling and absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, and excretion calculations are being used. An overview 
of machine learning and its applications in predictive toxicology is presented 
here, including support vector machines (SVMs), random forest (RF) and decision 
trees (DTs), neural networks, regression models, naïve Bayes, k-nearest 
neighbors, and ensemble learning. The recent successes of these machine learning 
methods in predictive toxicology are summarized, and a comparison of some models 
used in predictive toxicology is presented. In predictive toxicology, SVMs, RF, 
and DTs are the dominant machine learning methods due to the characteristics of 
the data available. Lastly, this review describes the current challenges facing 
the use of machine learning in predictive toxicology and offers insights into 
the possible areas of improvement in the field.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00316
PMID: 33356168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Chem Res Toxicol. 2022 Aug 15;35(8):1289-1290. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00196.

Artificial Intelligence Meets Toxicology.

Tetko IV(1)(2), Klambauer G(3), Clevert DA(4), Shah I(5), Benfenati E(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Structural Biology, Molecular Targets and Therapeutics Center, 
Helmholtz Munich-Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), 
85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
(2)BIGCHEM GmbH, Valerystr. 49, 85716 Unterschleißheim, Germany.
(3)ELLIS Unit Linz, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler 
University Linz, Altenbergerstraße 69, 4040 Linz, Austria.
(4)Machine Learning Research, Bayer AG, 13342 Berlin, Germany.
(5)Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure, Office of Research and 
Development, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina 27711, United States.
(6)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Istituto di Ricerche 
Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, 20156 Milano, Italy.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00196
PMID: 35965447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Pathol Inform. 2021 Nov 1;12:42. doi: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_36_21. eCollection 2021.

Deep Learning Approaches and Applications in Toxicologic Histopathology: Current 
Status and Future Perspectives.

Mehrvar S(1), Himmel LE(1), Babburi P(2), Goldberg AL(2), Guffroy M(1), 
Janardhan K(1), Krempley AL(1), Bawa B(1).

Author information:
(1)Preclinical Safety, AbbVie Inc., North Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Business Technology Solutions, AbbVie Inc., North Chicago, IL, USA.

Whole slide imaging enables the use of a wide array of digital image analysis 
tools that are revolutionizing pathology. Recent advances in digital pathology 
and deep convolutional neural networks have created an enormous opportunity to 
improve workflow efficiency, provide more quantitative, objective, and 
consistent assessments of pathology datasets, and develop decision support 
systems. Such innovations are already making their way into clinical practice. 
However, the progress of machine learning - in particular, deep learning (DL) - 
has been rather slower in nonclinical toxicology studies. Histopathology data 
from toxicology studies are critical during the drug development process that is 
required by regulatory bodies to assess drug-related toxicity in laboratory 
animals and its impact on human safety in clinical trials. Due to the high 
volume of slides routinely evaluated, low-throughput, or narrowly performing DL 
methods that may work well in small-scale diagnostic studies or for the 
identification of a single abnormality are tedious and impractical for 
toxicologic pathology. Furthermore, regulatory requirements around good 
laboratory practice are a major hurdle for the adoption of DL in toxicologic 
pathology. This paper reviews the major DL concepts, emerging applications, and 
examples of DL in toxicologic pathology image analysis. We end with a discussion 
of specific challenges and directions for future research.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Pathology Informatics.

DOI: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_36_21
PMCID: PMC8609289
PMID: 34881097

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees of AbbVie and may own 
AbbVie stock.The mention of the vendors in this paper does not imply an 
endorsement or recommendation.


16. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2014 Mar-Apr;69(2):115-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.vascn.2013.12.003. Epub 2013 Dec 20.

Progress in computational toxicology.

Ekins S(1).

Author information:
(1)Collaborations in Chemistry, 5616 Hilltop Needmore Road, Fuquay Varina, NC 
27526, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland, 20 
Penn Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Rutgers 
University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 
08854, USA; Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, UNC Eshelman 
School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7355, 
USA. Electronic address: ekinssean@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Computational methods have been widely applied to toxicology 
across pharmaceutical, consumer product and environmental fields over the past 
decade. Progress in computational toxicology is now reviewed.
METHODS: A literature review was performed on computational models for 
hepatotoxicity (e.g. for drug-induced liver injury (DILI)), cardiotoxicity, 
renal toxicity and genotoxicity. In addition various publications have been 
highlighted that use machine learning methods. Several computational toxicology 
model datasets from past publications were used to compare Bayesian and Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) learning methods.
RESULTS: The increasing amounts of data for defined toxicology endpoints have 
enabled machine learning models that have been increasingly used for 
predictions. It is shown that across many different models Bayesian and SVM 
perform similarly based on cross validation data.
DISCUSSION: Considerable progress has been made in computational toxicology in a 
decade in both model development and availability of larger scale or 'big data' 
models. The future efforts in toxicology data generation will likely provide us 
with hundreds of thousands of compounds that are readily accessible for machine 
learning models. These models will cover relevant chemistry space for 
pharmaceutical, consumer product and environmental applications.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vascn.2013.12.003
PMID: 24361690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Lab Invest. 2021 Apr;101(4):490-502. doi: 10.1038/s41374-020-00477-2. Epub 2020 
Aug 10.

Predictive modeling of estrogen receptor agonism, antagonism, and binding 
activities using machine- and deep-learning approaches.

Ciallella HL(#)(1), Russo DP(#)(1), Aleksunes LM(2), Grimm FA(3), Zhu H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Rutgers University, Camden, 
NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, 
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(3)ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Inc., Annandale, NJ, USA.
(4)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Rutgers University, Camden, 
NJ, USA. hao.zhu99@rutgers.edu.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, Camden, NJ, USA. 
hao.zhu99@rutgers.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

As defined by the World Health Organization, an endocrine disruptor is an 
exogenous substance or mixture that alters function(s) of the endocrine system 
and consequently causes adverse health effects in an intact organism, its 
progeny, or (sub)populations. Traditional experimental testing regimens to 
identify toxicants that induce endocrine disruption can be expensive and 
time-consuming. Computational modeling has emerged as a promising and 
cost-effective alternative method for screening and prioritizing potentially 
endocrine-active compounds. The efficient identification of suitable chemical 
descriptors and machine-learning algorithms, including deep learning, is a 
considerable challenge for computational toxicology studies. Here, we sought to 
apply classic machine-learning algorithms and deep-learning approaches to a 
panel of over 7500 compounds tested against 18 Toxicity Forecaster assays 
related to nuclear estrogen receptor (ERα and ERβ) activity. Three binary 
fingerprints (Extended Connectivity FingerPrints, Functional Connectivity 
FingerPrints, and Molecular ACCess System) were used as chemical descriptors in 
this study. Each descriptor was combined with four machine-learning and two 
deep- learning (normal and multitask neural networks) approaches to construct 
models for all 18 ER assays. The resulting model performance was evaluated using 
the area under the receiver- operating curve (AUC) values obtained from a 
fivefold cross-validation procedure. The results showed that individual models 
have AUC values that range from 0.56 to 0.86. External validation was conducted 
using two additional sets of compounds (n = 592 and n = 966) with established 
interactions with nuclear ER demonstrated through experimentation. An agonist, 
antagonist, or binding score was determined for each compound by averaging its 
predicted probabilities in relevant assay models as an external validation, 
yielding AUC values ranging from 0.63 to 0.91. The results suggest that 
multitask neural networks offer advantages when modeling mechanistically related 
endpoints. Consensus predictions based on the average values of individual 
models remain the best modeling strategy for computational toxicity evaluations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41374-020-00477-2
PMCID: PMC7873171
PMID: 32778734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


18. Adv Healthc Mater. 2021 Sep;10(18):e2100633. doi: 10.1002/adhm.202100633. Epub 
2021 Jul 22.

Emerging Technologies for In Vitro Inhalation Toxicology.

Singh AV(1), Romeo A(2), Scott K(2), Wagener S(1), Leibrock L(1), Laux P(1), 
Luch A(1), Kerkar P(3), Balakrishnan S(4), Dakua SP(4), Park BW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Product Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk 
Assessment (BfR), Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, Berlin, 10589, Germany.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Rayen School of Engineering, Youngstown 
State University, Youngstown, OH, 44555, USA.
(3)ICMR - National AIDS Research Institute (NARI), Pune, Maharashtra, 411026, 
India.
(4)Department of Surgery, Hamad Medical Corporation (HMC), PO Box 3050, Doha, 
Qatar.

Respiratory toxicology remains a major research area in the 21st century since 
current scenario of airborne viral infection transmission and pollutant 
inhalation is expected to raise the annual morbidity beyond 2 million. Clinical 
and epidemiological research connecting human exposure to air contaminants to 
understand adverse pulmonary health outcomes is, therefore, an immediate subject 
of human health assessment. Important observations in defining systemic effects 
of environmental contaminants on inhalation metabolic dysfunction, liver health, 
and gastrointestinal tract have been well explored with in vivo models. In this 
review, a framework is provided, a paradigm is established about inhalation 
toxicity testing in vitro, and a brief overview of breathing Lungs-on-Chip (LoC) 
as design concepts is given. The optimized bioengineering approaches and 
microfluidics with their fundamental pros, and cons are presented. There are 
different strategies that researchers apply to inhalation toxicity studies to 
assess a variety of inhalable substances and relevant LoC approaches. A case 
study from published literature and frame arguments about reproducibility as 
well as in vitro/in vivo correlations are discussed. Finally, the opportunities 
and challenges in soft robotics, systems inhalation toxicology approach 
integrating bioengineering, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to 
address a multitude model for future toxicology are discussed.

© 2021 The Authors. Advanced Healthcare Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202100633
PMID: 34292676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Drug Metab Rev. 2020 May;52(2):283-298. doi: 10.1080/03602532.2020.1726944. Epub 
2020 Feb 21.

Entering the era of computationally driven drug development.

Maharao N(1), Antontsev V(1), Wright M(2), Varshney J(1).

Author information:
(1)VeriSIM Life Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)DMPK, Genentech Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.

Historically, failure rates in drug development are high; increased 
sophistication and investment throughout the process has shifted the reasons for 
attrition, but the overall success rates have remained stubbornly and 
consistently low. Only 8% of new entities entering clinical testing gain 
regulatory approval, indicating that significant obstacles still exist for 
efficient therapeutic development. The continued high failure rate can be 
partially attributed to the inability to link drug exposure with the magnitude 
of observed safety and efficacy-related pharmacodynamic (PD) responses; 
frequently, this is a result of nonclinical models exhibiting poor prediction of 
human outcomes across a wide range of disease conditions, resulting in faulty 
evaluation of drug toxicology and efficacy. However, the increasing quality and 
standardization of experimental methods in preclinical stages of testing has 
created valuable data sets within companies that can be leveraged to further 
improve the efficiency and accuracy of preclinical prediction for both 
pharmacokinetics (PK) and PD. Models of Quantitative structure-activity 
relationships (QSAR), physiologically based pharmacokinetics (PBPK), and PK/PD 
relationships have also improved efficiency. Founded on a core understanding of 
biochemistry and physiological interactions of xenobiotics, these in silico 
methods have the potential to increase the probability of compound success in 
clinical trials. Integration of traditional computational methods with 
machine-learning approaches and existing internal pharma databases stands to 
make a fundamental impact on the speed and accuracy of predictions during the 
process of drug development and approval.

DOI: 10.1080/03602532.2020.1726944
PMID: 32083960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1800:535-557. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7899-1_25.

Predictive Systems Toxicology.

Kiani NA(1)(2)(3), Shang MM(4)(5), Zenil H(4)(6)(5), Tegner J(4)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Computational Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. narsis.kiani@ki.se.
(2)Algorithmic Dynamics Lab, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. narsis.kiani@ki.se.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden. narsis.kiani@ki.se.
(4)Unit of Computational Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden.
(6)Algorithmic Dynamics Lab, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division, Computer, 
Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division, King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

In this review we address to what extent computational techniques can augment 
our ability to predict toxicity. The first section provides a brief history of 
empirical observations on toxicity dating back to the dawn of Sumerian 
civilization. Interestingly, the concept of dose emerged very early on, leading 
up to the modern emphasis on kinetic properties, which in turn encodes the 
insight that toxicity is not solely a property of a compound but instead depends 
on the interaction with the host organism. The next logical step is the current 
conception of evaluating drugs from a personalized medicine point of view. We 
review recent work on integrating what could be referred to as classical 
pharmacokinetic analysis with emerging systems biology approaches incorporating 
multiple omics data. These systems approaches employ advanced statistical 
analytical data processing complemented with machine learning techniques and use 
both pharmacokinetic and omics data. We find that such integrated approaches not 
only provide improved predictions of toxicity but also enable mechanistic 
interpretations of the molecular mechanisms underpinning toxicity and drug 
resistance. We conclude the chapter by discussing some of the main challenges, 
such as how to balance the inherent tension between the predicitive capacity of 
models, which in practice amounts to constraining the number of features in the 
models versus allowing for rich mechanistic interpretability, i.e., equipping 
models with numerous molecular features. This challenge also requires 
patient-specific predictions on toxicity, which in turn requires proper 
stratification of patients as regards how they respond, with or without adverse 
toxic effects. In summary, the transformation of the ancient concept of dose is 
currently successfully operationalized using rich integrative data encoded in 
patient-specific models.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7899-1_25
PMID: 29934910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 Feb 15;34(2):541-549. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00373. Epub 2021 Jan 29.

Trade-off Predictivity and Explainability for Machine-Learning Powered 
Predictive Toxicology: An in-Depth Investigation with Tox21 Data Sets.

Wu L(1), Huang R(2), Tetko IV(3)(4), Xia Z(3), Xu J(1), Tong W(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, National Center for 
Toxicological Research, FDA, 3900 NCTR Road, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, United 
States.
(2)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 9800 Medical Center 
Drive, Rockville, Maryland 20850, United States.
(3)Institute of Structural Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München-Research Center 
for Environmental Health (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(4)BIGCHEM GmbH, Valerystraße 49, DE-85716 Unterschleißheim, Germany.

Selecting a model in predictive toxicology often involves a trade-off between 
prediction performance and explainability: should we sacrifice the model 
performance to gain explainability or vice versa. Here we present a 
comprehensive study to assess algorithm and feature influences on model 
performance in chemical toxicity research. We conducted over 5000 models for a 
Tox21 bioassay data set of 65 assays and ∼7600 compounds. Seven molecular 
representations as features and 12 modeling approaches varying in complexity and 
explainability were employed to systematically investigate the impact of various 
factors on model performance and explainability. We demonstrated that end points 
dictated a model's performance, regardless of the chosen modeling approach 
including deep learning and chemical features. Overall, more complex models such 
as (LS-)SVM and Random Forest performed marginally better than simpler models 
such as linear regression and KNN in the presented Tox21 data analysis. Since a 
simpler model with acceptable performance often also is easy to interpret for 
the Tox21 data set, it clearly was the preferred choice due to its better 
explainability. Given that each data set had its own error structure both for 
dependent and independent variables, we strongly recommend that it is important 
to conduct a systematic study with a broad range of model complexity and feature 
explainability to identify model balancing its predictivity and explainability.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00373
PMCID: PMC8867471
PMID: 33513003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Toxicol Res (Camb). 2018 May 1;7(5):732-744. doi: 10.1039/c8tx00051d. 
eCollection 2018 Sep 1.

Big-data and machine learning to revamp computational toxicology and its use in 
risk assessment.

Luechtefeld T(1), Rowlands C(2), Hartung T(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School 
of Public Health , 615 N. Wolfe Street , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA . Email: 
THartun1@jhu.edu.
(2)Underwriters Laboratories (UL) , UL Product Supply Chain Intelligence , 333 
Pfingsten Road , Northbrook , IL 60062 , USA.

The creation of large toxicological databases and advances in machine-learning 
techniques have empowered computational approaches in toxicology. Work with 
these large databases based on regulatory data has allowed reproducibility 
assessment of animal models, which highlight weaknesses in traditional in vivo 
methods. This should lower the bars for the introduction of new approaches and 
represents a benchmark that is achievable for any alternative method validated 
against these methods. Quantitative Structure Activity Relationships (QSAR) 
models for skin sensitization, eye irritation, and other human health hazards 
based on these big databases, however, also have made apparent some of the 
challenges facing computational modeling, including validation challenges, model 
interpretation issues, and model selection issues. A first implementation of 
machine learning-based predictions termed REACHacross achieved unprecedented 
sensitivities of >80% with specificities >70% in predicting the six most common 
acute and topical hazards covering about two thirds of the chemical universe. 
While this is awaiting formal validation, it demonstrates the new quality 
introduced by big data and modern data-mining technologies. The rapid increase 
in the diversity and number of computational models, as well as the data they 
are based on, create challenges and opportunities for the use of computational 
methods.

DOI: 10.1039/c8tx00051d
PMCID: PMC6116175
PMID: 30310652


23. Nat Mater. 2019 May;18(5):418-422. doi: 10.1038/s41563-019-0332-5.

Opportunities and challenges using artificial intelligence in ADME/Tox.

Bhhatarai B(1), Walters WP(2), Hop CECA(3), Lanza G(4), Ekins S(5).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Relay Therapeutics, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Numerate, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Collaborations Pharmaceuticals Inc., Raleigh, NC, USA. 
sean@collaborationspharma.com.

A recent conference organized a panel of scientists representing small and big 
pharma companies, who work at the interface of machine learning (ML) and 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicology (ADME/Tox). With 
the recent rebirth of AI related to pharma, it is timely to present this 
collaborative commentary to capture the diverging opinions on the past, present 
and future role of AI for ADME/Tox and how it can be applied in newer areas such 
as nanomaterials.

DOI: 10.1038/s41563-019-0332-5
PMCID: PMC6594826
PMID: 31000801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Toxicol Res (Camb). 2020 Oct 8;9(5):676-682. doi: 10.1093/toxres/tfaa063. 
eCollection 2020 Sep.

A decade of toxicological trends: what the papers say.

Sikakana P(1), Roberts RA(1).

Author information:
(1)ApconiX, Alderley Park SK10 4TG, UK.

Here we look at popular trends and concepts in toxicology over the decade 
2009-2019. The top 10 concepts included methodological approaches such as 
zebrafish and genomics as well as broader concepts such as personalized medicine 
and adverse outcome pathways. The total number and rank order for each of the 
top 10 were tracked year by year via PubMed with >9500 papers contributing to 
the analysis. The data revealed a slow upward trend in the number of papers 
across all the concepts from 260 in 2009 to >1700 in 2019. Zebrafish, genomics 
and personalized medicine remained in the top four slots since 2009 with 
zebrafish dominating the rankings over the entire decade. Genomics was a strong 
second until 2013 when it was displaced first by the microbiome in 2014 and 
secondly by personalized medicine in 2015. Other notable trends were the 
ascendancy of the microbiome and adverse outcome pathways and the descendancy of 
hormesis and the 3Rs (replacement, reduction and refinement of animals in 
testing). The observation that the top four slots have been static over the past 
4 years suggests that new ideas are introduced and increase in popularity until 
they find their place in scientific culture. This may suggest that relatively 
new concepts such as artificial intelligence and microphysiological systems have 
yet to find their steady state in the rankings. Similarly, as a relatively new 
player in toxicology, the full impact of the human microbiome on drug efficacy 
and safety remains to be seen.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxres/tfaa063
PMCID: PMC7640932
PMID: 33178428


25. J Hazard Mater. 2022 Sep 15;438:129487. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.129487. Epub 
2022 Jun 27.

Machine learning in the identification, prediction and exploration of 
environmental toxicology: Challenges and perspectives.

Wu X(1), Zhou Q(1), Mu L(2), Hu X(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of 
Education)/Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300350, China.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Agro-environment and Safe-product, Key Laboratory 
for Environmental Factors Control of Agro-product Quality Safety (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs), Institute of Agro-environmental Protection, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Tianjin 300191, China. Electronic 
address: muli@caas.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of 
Education)/Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300350, China. Electronic address: huxiangang@nankai.edu.cn.

Over the past few decades, data-driven machine learning (ML) has distinguished 
itself from hypothesis-driven studies and has recently received much attention 
in environmental toxicology. However, the use of ML in environmental toxicology 
remains in the early stages, with knowledge gaps, technical bottlenecks in data 
quality, high-dimensional/heterogeneous/small-sample data analysis and model 
interpretability, and a lack of an in-depth understanding of environmental 
toxicology. Given the above problems, we review the recent progress in the 
literature and highlight state-of-the-art toxicological studies using ML (such 
as learning and predicting toxicity in complicated biosystems and 
multiple-factor environmental scenarios of long-term and large-scale pollution). 
Beyond predicting simple biological endpoints by integrating untargeted omics 
and adverse outcome pathways, ML development should focus on revealing 
toxicological mechanisms. The integration of data-driven ML with other methods 
(e.g., omics analysis and adverse outcome pathway frameworks) endows ML with 
widely promising application in revealing toxicological mechanisms. High-quality 
databases and interpretable algorithms are urgently needed for toxicology and 
environmental science. Addressing the core issues and future challenges for ML 
in this review may narrow the knowledge gap between environmental toxicity and 
computational science and facilitate the control of environmental risk in the 
future.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.129487
PMID: 35816807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Nov;44(6):855-869. doi: 10.1111/jvp.12961. Epub 2021 
Mar 14.

Applying metabolomics to veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics.

Rivera-Velez SM(1), Navas J(2), Villarino NF(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Determinants Core, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, Saint 
Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(2)Program in Individualized Medicine, Department of Veterinary Clinical 
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington, USA.

Metabolomics is the large-scale study of low-molecular-weight substances in a 
biological system in a given physiological state at a given time point. 
Metabolomics can be applied to identify predictors of inter-individual 
variability in drug response, provide clinicians with data useful for 
decision-making processes in drug selection, and inform about the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a drug. It is, therefore, an 
exceptional approach for gaining new understanding effects in the field of 
comparative veterinary pharmacology. However, the incorporation of metabolomics 
into veterinary pharmacology and toxicology is not yet widespread, and this is 
probably, at least in part, a result of its highly multidisciplinary nature. 
This article reviews the potential applications of metabolomics in veterinary 
pharmacology and therapeutics. It integrates key concepts for designing 
metabolomics studies and analyzing and interpreting metabolomics data, providing 
solid foundations for applying metabolomics to the study of drugs in all 
veterinary species.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvp.12961
PMID: 33719079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Molecules. 2018 Sep 18;23(9):2384. doi: 10.3390/molecules23092384.

Deep Learning in Drug Discovery and Medicine; Scratching the Surface.

Dana D(1), Gadhiya SV(2), St Surin LG(3), Li D(4), Naaz F(5), Ali Q(6), Paka 
L(7), Yamin MA(8), Narayan M(9), Goldberg ID(10), Narayan P(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. ddana@angion.com.
(2)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. sgadhiya@angion.com.
(3)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. lstsuri1@jhu.edu.
(4)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. david_li@college.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. fnaaz@angion.com.
(6)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. qali@angion.com.
(7)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. spaka@angion.com.
(8)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. myamin@angion.com.
(9)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas, El Paso, 
TX 79968, USA. manarayan@utep.edu.
(10)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. igoldberg@angion.com.
(11)Department of Preclinical Research, Angion Biomedica Corporation, Nassau, NY 
11553, USA. pnarayan@angion.com.

The practice of medicine is ever evolving. Diagnosing disease, which is often 
the first step in a cure, has seen a sea change from the discerning hands of the 
neighborhood physician to the use of sophisticated machines to use of 
information gleaned from biomarkers obtained by the most minimally invasive of 
means. The last 100 or so years have borne witness to the enormous success story 
of allopathy, a practice that found favor over earlier practices of medical 
purgatory and homeopathy. Nevertheless, failures of this approach coupled with 
the omics and bioinformatics revolution spurred precision medicine, a platform 
wherein the molecular profile of an individual patient drives the selection of 
therapy. Indeed, precision medicine-based therapies that first found their place 
in oncology are rapidly finding uses in autoimmune, renal and other diseases. 
More recently a new renaissance that is shaping everyday life is making its way 
into healthcare. Drug discovery and medicine that started with Ayurveda in India 
are now benefiting from an altogether different artificial intelligence (AI)-one 
which is automating the invention of new chemical entities and the mining of 
large databases in health-privacy-protected vaults. Indeed, disciplines as 
diverse as language, neurophysiology, chemistry, toxicology, biostatistics, 
medicine and computing have come together to harness algorithms based on 
transfer learning and recurrent neural networks to design novel drug candidates, 
a priori inform on their safety, metabolism and clearance, and engineer their 
delivery but only on demand, all the while cataloging and comparing omics 
signatures across traditionally classified diseases to enable basket treatment 
strategies. This review highlights inroads made and being made in directed-drug 
design and molecular therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23092384
PMCID: PMC6225282
PMID: 30231499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


28. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Oct 9;9:1134. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01134. eCollection 
2018.

Network-Based Methods for Prediction of Drug-Target Interactions.

Wu Z(1), Li W(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.

Drug-target interaction (DTI) is the basis of drug discovery. However, it is 
time-consuming and costly to determine DTIs experimentally. Over the past 
decade, various computational methods were proposed to predict potential DTIs 
with high efficiency and low costs. These methods can be roughly divided into 
several categories, such as molecular docking-based, pharmacophore-based, 
similarity-based, machine learning-based, and network-based methods. Among them, 
network-based methods, which do not rely on three-dimensional structures of 
targets and negative samples, have shown great advantages over the others. In 
this article, we focused on network-based methods for DTI prediction, in 
particular our network-based inference (NBI) methods that were derived from 
recommendation algorithms. We first introduced the methodologies and evaluation 
of network-based methods, and then the emphasis was put on their applications in 
a wide range of fields, including target prediction and elucidation of molecular 
mechanisms of therapeutic effects or safety problems. Finally, limitations and 
perspectives of network-based methods were discussed. In a word, network-based 
methods provide alternative tools for studies in drug repurposing, new drug 
discovery, systems pharmacology and systems toxicology.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01134
PMCID: PMC6189482
PMID: 30356768


29. Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 5;8(1):16354. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-34455-y.

Deep Analysis of Mitochondria and Cell Health Using Machine Learning.

Zahedi A(1)(2), On V(3), Phandthong R(2), Chaili A(2), Remark G(2), Bhanu 
B(1)(3)(4), Talbot P(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, CA., 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California, 
Riverside, CA., USA.
(3)Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of California, 
Riverside, CA., USA.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Riverside, CA., 
USA.
(5)Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, CA., 
USA. talbot@ucr.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California, 
Riverside, CA., USA. talbot@ucr.edu.

There is a critical need for better analytical methods to study mitochondria in 
normal and diseased states. Mitochondrial image analysis is typically done on 
still images using slow manual methods or automated methods of limited types of 
features. MitoMo integrated software overcomes these bottlenecks by automating 
rapid unbiased quantitative analysis of mitochondrial morphology, texture, 
motion, and morphogenesis and advances machine-learning classification to 
predict cell health by combining features. Our pixel-based approach for motion 
analysis evaluates the magnitude and direction of motion of: (1) molecules 
within mitochondria, (2) individual mitochondria, and (3) distinct morphological 
classes of mitochondria. MitoMo allows analysis of mitochondrial morphogenesis 
in time-lapse videos to study early progression of cellular stress. Biological 
applications are presented including: (1) establishing normal phenotypes of 
mitochondria in different cell types; (2) quantifying stress-induced 
mitochondrial hyperfusion in cells treated with an environmental toxicant, (3) 
tracking morphogenesis in mitochondria undergoing swelling, and (4) evaluating 
early changes in cell health when morphological abnormalities are not apparent. 
MitoMo unlocks new information on mitochondrial phenotypes and dynamics by 
enabling deep analysis of mitochondrial features in any cell type and can be 
applied to a broad spectrum of research problems in cell biology, drug testing, 
toxicology, and medicine.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-34455-y
PMCID: PMC6218515
PMID: 30397207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


30. Mutagenesis. 2020 Mar 27;35(2):153-159. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geaa007.

The promise of toxicogenomics for genetic toxicology: past, present and future.

David R(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.

Toxicogenomics, the application of genomics to toxicology, was described as 'a 
new era' for toxicology. Standard toxicity tests typically involve a number of 
short-term bioassays that are costly, time consuming, require large numbers of 
animals and generally focus on a single end point. Toxicogenomics was heralded 
as a way to improve the efficiency of toxicity testing by assessing gene 
regulation across the genome, allowing rapid classification of compounds based 
on characteristic expression profiles. Gene expression microarrays could measure 
and characterise genome-wide gene expression changes in a single study and while 
transcriptomic profiles that can discriminate between genotoxic and 
non-genotoxic carcinogens have been identified, challenges with the approach 
limited its application. As such, toxicogenomics did not transform the field of 
genetic toxicology in the way it was predicted. More recently, next generation 
sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionised genomics owing to the fact 
that hundreds of billions of base pairs can be sequenced simultaneously cheaper 
and quicker than traditional Sanger methods. In relation to genetic toxicology, 
and thousands of cancer genomes have been sequenced with single-base 
substitution mutational signatures identified, and mutation signatures have been 
identified following treatment of cells with known or suspected environmental 
carcinogens. RNAseq has been applied to detect transcriptional changes following 
treatment with genotoxins; modified RNAseq protocols have been developed to 
identify adducts in the genome and Duplex sequencing is an example of a 
technique that has recently been developed to accurately detect mutation. 
Machine learning, including MutationSeq and SomaticSeq, has also been applied to 
somatic mutation detection and improvements in automation and/or the application 
of machine learning algorithms may allow high-throughput mutation sequencing in 
the future. This review will discuss the initial promise of transcriptomics for 
genetic toxicology, and how the development of NGS technologies and new machine 
learning algorithms may finally realise that promise.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the UK 
Environmental Mutagen Society.All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/geaa007
PMID: 32087008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2020 Apr 8;10(4):708. doi: 10.3390/nano10040708.

Transcriptomics in Toxicogenomics, Part III: Data Modelling for Risk Assessment.

Serra A(1)(2), Fratello M(1)(2), Cattelani L(1)(2), Liampa I(3), Melagraki G(4), 
Kohonen P(5)(6), Nymark P(5)(6), Federico A(1)(2), Kinaret PAS(1)(2)(7), 
Jagiello K(8)(9), Ha MK(10)(11)(12), Choi JS(10)(11)(12), Sanabria N(13), 
Gulumian M(13)(14), Puzyn T(8)(9), Yoon TH(10)(11)(12), Sarimveis H(3), 
Grafström R(5)(6), Afantitis A(4), Greco D(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, FI-33014 
Tampere, Finland.
(2)BioMediTech Institute, Tampere University, FI-33014 Tampere, Finland.
(3)School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 157 
80 Athens, Greece.
(4)Nanoinformatics Department, NovaMechanics Ltd., Nicosia 1065, Cyprus.
(5)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Division of Toxicology, Misvik Biology, 20520 Turku, Finland.
(7)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(8)QSAR Lab Ltd., Aleja Grunwaldzka 190/102, 80-266 Gdansk, Poland.
(9)University of Gdansk, Faculty of Chemistry, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308 Gdansk, 
Poland.
(10)Center for Next Generation Cytometry, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, 
Korea.
(11)Department of Chemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, 
Seoul 04763, Korea.
(12)Institute of Next Generation Material Design, Hanyang University, Seoul 
04763, Korea.
(13)National Institute for Occupational Health, Johannesburg 30333, South 
Africa.
(14)Haematology and Molecular Medicine Department, School of Pathology, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

Transcriptomics data are relevant to address a number of challenges in 
Toxicogenomics (TGx). After careful planning of exposure conditions and data 
preprocessing, the TGx data can be used in predictive toxicology, where more 
advanced modelling techniques are applied. The large volume of molecular 
profiles produced by omics-based technologies allows the development and 
application of artificial intelligence (AI) methods in TGx. Indeed, the publicly 
available omics datasets are constantly increasing together with a plethora of 
different methods that are made available to facilitate their analysis, 
interpretation and the generation of accurate and stable predictive models. In 
this review, we present the state-of-the-art of data modelling applied to 
transcriptomics data in TGx. We show how the benchmark dose (BMD) analysis can 
be applied to TGx data. We review read across and adverse outcome pathways (AOP) 
modelling methodologies. We discuss how network-based approaches can be 
successfully employed to clarify the mechanism of action (MOA) or specific 
biomarkers of exposure. We also describe the main AI methodologies applied to 
TGx data to create predictive classification and regression models and we 
address current challenges. Finally, we present a short description of deep 
learning (DL) and data integration methodologies applied in these contexts. 
Modelling of TGx data represents a valuable tool for more accurate chemical 
safety assessment. This review is the third part of a three-article series on 
Transcriptomics in Toxicogenomics.

DOI: 10.3390/nano10040708
PMCID: PMC7221955
PMID: 32276469

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


32. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1800:119-139. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7899-1_5.

Machine Learning Methods in Computational Toxicology.

Baskin II(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Physics, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian 
Federation. igbaskin@gmail.com.
(2)Butlerov Institute of Chemistry, Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russian 
Federation. igbaskin@gmail.com.

Various methods of machine learning, supervised and unsupervised, linear and 
nonlinear, classification and regression, in combination with various types of 
molecular descriptors, both "handcrafted" and "data-driven," are considered in 
the context of their use in computational toxicology. The use of multiple linear 
regression, variants of naïve Bayes classifier, k-nearest neighbors, support 
vector machine, decision trees, ensemble learning, random forest, several types 
of neural networks, and deep learning is the focus of attention of this review. 
The role of fragment descriptors, graph mining, and graph kernels is 
highlighted. The application of unsupervised methods, such as Kohonen's 
self-organizing maps and related approaches, which allow for combining 
predictions with data analysis and visualization, is also considered. The 
necessity of applying a wide range of machine learning methods in computational 
toxicology is underlined.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7899-1_5
PMID: 29934890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Jul 6;13(7):1026. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13071026.

Machine Learning Uncovers Adverse Drug Effects on Intestinal Bacteria.

McCoubrey LE(1), Elbadawi M(1), Orlu M(1), Gaisford S(1), Basit AW(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL School of Pharmacy, University College London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, 
London WC1N 1AX, UK.

The human gut microbiome, composed of trillions of microorganisms, plays an 
essential role in human health. Many factors shape gut microbiome composition 
over the life span, including changes to diet, lifestyle, and medication use. 
Though not routinely tested during drug development, drugs can exert profound 
effects on the gut microbiome, potentially altering its functions and promoting 
disease. This study develops a machine learning (ML) model to predict whether 
drugs will impair the growth of 40 gut bacterial strains. Trained on over 18,600 
drug-bacteria interactions, 13 distinct ML models are built and compared, 
including tree-based, ensemble, and artificial neural network techniques. 
Following hyperparameter tuning and multi-metric evaluation, a lead ML model is 
selected: a tuned extra trees algorithm with performances of AUROC: 0.857 
(±0.014), recall: 0.587 (±0.063), precision: 0.800 (±0.053), and f1: 0.666 
(±0.042). This model can be used by the pharmaceutical industry during drug 
development and could even be adapted for use in clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13071026
PMCID: PMC8308984
PMID: 34371718

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


34. Chem Res Toxicol. 2020 Jan 21;33(1):20-37. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00227. 
Epub 2019 Nov 22.

An Overview of Machine Learning and Big Data for Drug Toxicity Evaluation.

Vo AH(1), Van Vleet TR(1), Gupta RR(2), Liguori MJ(1), Rao MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical Safety , AbbVie , 1 North Waukegan Road , North 
Chicago , Illinois 60064 , United States.
(2)Information Research, Research and Development , AbbVie , 1 North Waukegan 
Road , North Chicago , Illinois 60064 , United States.

Drug toxicity evaluation is an essential process of drug development as it is 
reportedly responsible for the attrition of approximately 30% of drug 
candidates. The rapid increase in the number and types of large toxicology data 
sets together with the advances in computational methods may be used to improve 
many steps in drug safety evaluation. The development of in silico models to 
screen and understand mechanisms of drug toxicity may be particularly beneficial 
in the early stages of drug development where early toxicity assessment can most 
reduce expenses and labor time. To facilitate this, machine learning methods 
have been employed to evaluate drug toxicity but are often limited by small and 
less diverse data sets. Recent advances in machine learning methods together 
with the rapid increase in big toxicity data such as molecular descriptors, 
toxicogenomics, and high-throughput bioactivity data may help alleviate some of 
the current challenges. In this article, the most common machine learning 
methods used in toxicity assessment are reviewed together with examples of 
toxicity studies that have used machine learning methodology. Furthermore, a 
comprehensive overview of the different types of toxicity tools and data sets 
available to build in silico toxicity prediction models has been provided to 
give an overview of the current big toxicity data landscape and highlight 
opportunities and challenges related to them.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00227
PMID: 31625725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Toxicol In Vitro. 2020 Aug;66:104877. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2020.104877. Epub 2020 
May 6.

Applying knowledge-driven mechanistic inference to toxicogenomics.

Tripodi IJ(1), Callahan TJ(2), Westfall JT(3), Meitzer NS(4), Dowell RD(5), 
Hunter LE(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado, Computer Science / Interdisciplinary Quantitative 
Biology, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic address: 
ignacio.tripodi@colorado.edu.
(2)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Computational Bioscience, 
Denver, CO 80045, USA.
(3)University of Colorado, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, 
Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(4)University of Colorado, Chemical Engineering, Denver, CO 80309, USA.
(5)University of Colorado, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology / 
Interdisciplinary Quantitative Biology, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(6)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Computational Bioscience / 
Interdisciplinary Quantitative Biology, Denver, CO 80045, USA.

When considering toxic chemicals in the environment, a mechanistic, causal 
explanation of toxicity may be preferred over a statistical or machine 
learning-based prediction by itself. Elucidating a mechanism of toxicity is, 
however, a costly and time-consuming process that requires the participation of 
specialists from a variety of fields, often relying on animal models. We present 
an innovative mechanistic inference framework (MechSpy), which can be used as a 
hypothesis generation aid to narrow the scope of mechanistic toxicology 
analysis. MechSpy generates hypotheses of the most likely mechanisms of 
toxicity, by combining a semantically-interconnected knowledge representation of 
human biology, toxicology and biochemistry with gene expression time series on 
human tissue. Using vector representations of biological entities, MechSpy seeks 
enrichment in a manually curated list of high-level mechanisms of toxicity, 
represented as biochemically- and causally-linked ontology concepts. Besides 
predicting the canonical mechanism of toxicity for many well-studied compounds, 
we experimentally validated some of our predictions for other chemicals without 
an established mechanism of toxicity. This mechanistic inference framework is an 
advantageous tool for predictive toxicology, and the first of its kind to 
produce a mechanistic explanation for each prediction. MechSpy can be modified 
to include additional mechanisms of toxicity, and is generalizable to other 
types of mechanisms of human biology.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2020.104877
PMCID: PMC7306473
PMID: 32387679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest One author 
(RDD) of this publication is a founder and scientific advisor for Arpeggio 
Biosciences.


36. Cureus. 2022 Aug 25;14(8):e28376. doi: 10.7759/cureus.28376. eCollection 2022 
Aug.

Artificial Intelligence in Forensic Medicine and Toxicology: The Future of 
Forensic Medicine.

Wankhade TD(1), Ingale SW(1), Mohite PM(1), Bankar NJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Forensic Medicine, Datta Meghe Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Nagpur, IND.
(2)Microbiology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Wardha, IND.

The predominance of artificial intelligence (AI) will be the next Industrial 
Revolution. All the fields of industry will be reshaped with AI. Forensic 
medicine and toxicology is an important branch for investigations of crimes and 
this branch has tremendous scope of development with the help of AI. Any science 
or process cannot stay away long from newer techniques. The traditional way of 
doing an autopsy and framing an opinion has a lot of limitations and these 
limitations can be overcome with AI. Various procedures of forensic medicine 
like analysis of toxins, collection of the various samples of medicolegal 
importance from body cavity, detection of pathological changes in various organs 
of the body, detection of various stains on the body, detection of a weapon used 
in crime, time since death calculations, etc. are the areas where AI will play a 
key role in framing the various opinions of medicolegal importance. AI can also 
be integrated into existing testing and analysis processes to make the whole 
procedure rapid and more accurate. In the future, AI might become a key part of 
forensic medicine and toxicology practice.

Copyright © 2022, Wankhade et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.28376
PMCID: PMC9506671
PMID: 36168339

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


37. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev. 2018;36(4):252-271. doi: 
10.1080/10590501.2018.1537563. Epub 2019 Mar 1.

Deep learning for predicting toxicity of chemicals: a mini review.

Tang W(1), Chen J(1), Wang Z(1), Xie H(1), Hong H(2).

Author information:
(1)a Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
School of Environmental Science and Technology , Dalian University of Technology 
, Dalian , China.
(2)b National Center for Toxicological Research , U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration , Jefferson , Arkansas , USA.

Humans and wildlife inhabit a world with panoply of natural and synthetic 
chemicals. Alarmingly, only a limited number of chemicals have undergone 
comprehensive toxicological evaluation due to limitations of traditional 
toxicity testing. High-throughput screening assays provide a higher-speed 
alternative for conventional toxicity testing. Advancement of high-throughput 
bioassay technology has greatly increased chemical toxicity data volumes in the 
past decade, pushing toxicology research into a "big data" era. However, 
traditional data analysis methods fail to effectively process large data 
volumes, presenting both a challenge and an opportunity for toxicologists. Deep 
learning, a machine learning method leveraging deep neural networks (DNNs), is a 
proven useful tool for building quantitative structure-activity relationship 
(QSAR) models for toxicity prediction utilizing these new large datasets. In 
this mini review, a brief technical background on DNNs is provided, and the 
current state of chemical toxicity prediction models built with DNNs is 
reviewed. In addition, relevant toxicity data sources are summarized, possible 
limitations are discussed, and perspectives on DNN utilization in chemical 
toxicity prediction are given.

DOI: 10.1080/10590501.2018.1537563
PMID: 30821199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Neuropharmacology. 2019 Mar 15;147:11-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.05.035. 
Epub 2018 Jun 1.

Repurposing drugs to treat l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease.

Johnston TH(1), Lacoste AMB(2), Visanji NP(3), Lang AE(3), Fox SH(3), Brotchie 
JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Krembil Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Atuka Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic address: 
tom.johnston@uhnresearch.ca.
(2)IBM Watson Health, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Edmund J Safra Movement Disorders Clinic, Division of Neurology, University 
of Toronto, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Krembil Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
Atuka Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada.

In this review, we discuss the opportunity for repurposing drugs for use in 
l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID) in Parkinson's disease. LID is a particularly 
suitable indication for drug repurposing given its pharmacological diversity, 
translatability of animal-models, availability of Phase II proof-of-concept 
(PoC) methodologies and the indication-specific regulatory environment. A 
compound fit for repurposing is defined as one with appropriate human 
safety-data as well as animal safety, toxicology and pharmacokinetic data as 
found in an Investigational New Drug (IND) package for another indication. We 
first focus on how such repurposing candidates can be identified and then 
discuss development strategies that might progress such a candidate towards a 
Phase II clinical PoC. We discuss traditional means for identifying repurposing 
candidates and contrast these with newer approaches, especially focussing on the 
use of computational and artificial intelligence (AI) platforms. We discuss 
strategies that can be categorised broadly as: in vivo phenotypic screening in a 
hypothesis-free manner; in vivo phenotypic screening based on analogy to a 
related disorder; hypothesis-driven evaluation of candidates in vivo and in 
silico screening with a hypothesis-agnostic component to the selection. To 
highlight the power of AI approaches, we describe a case study using IBM Watson 
where a training set of compounds, with demonstrated ability to reduce LID, were 
employed to identify novel repurposing candidates. Using the approaches 
discussed, many diverse candidates for repurposing in LID, originally envisaged 
for other indications, will be described that have already been evaluated for 
efficacy in non-human primate models of LID and/or clinically. This article is 
part of the Special Issue entitled 'Drug Repurposing: old molecules, new ways to 
fast track drug discovery and development for CNS disorders'.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.05.035
PMID: 29907424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Aug 26;18(17):8985. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18178985.

Catalyzing Knowledge-Driven Discovery in Environmental Health Sciences through a 
Community-Driven Harmonized Language.

Holmgren SD(1), Boyles RR(2), Cronk RD(3), Duncan CG(4), Kwok RK(5)(6), Lunn 
RM(7), Osborn KC(8), Thessen AE(9), Schmitt CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of Data Science, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
(NIEHS), Durham, NC 27709, USA.
(2)Research Computing, RTI International, Durham, NC 27709, USA.
(3)Health Sciences, ICF, Durham, NC 27713, USA.
(4)Genes, Environment, and Health Branch, Division of Extramural Research and 
Training, NIEHS, Durham, NC 27709, USA.
(5)Epidemiology Branch, Division of Intramural Research, NIEHS, Durham, NC 
27709, USA.
(6)Office of the Director, NIEHS, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(7)Integrative Health Assessment Branch, Division of the National Toxicology 
Program, NIEHS, Durham, NC 27709, USA.
(8)Health Sciences, ICF, Fairfax, VA 22031, USA.
(9)Environmental and Molecular Toxicology Department, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

Harmonized language is critical for helping researchers to find data, collecting 
scientific data to facilitate comparison, and performing pooled and 
meta-analyses. Using standard terms to link data to knowledge systems 
facilitates knowledge-driven analysis, allows for the use of biomedical 
knowledge bases for scientific interpretation and hypothesis generation, and 
increasingly supports artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning. Due to 
the breadth of environmental health sciences (EHS) research and the continuous 
evolution in scientific methods, the gaps in standard terminologies, 
vocabularies, ontologies, and related tools hamper the capabilities to address 
large-scale, complex EHS research questions that require the integration of 
disparate data and knowledge sources. The results of prior workshops to advance 
a harmonized environmental health language demonstrate that future efforts 
should be sustained and grounded in scientific need. We describe a community 
initiative whose mission was to advance integrative environmental health 
sciences research via the development and adoption of a harmonized language. The 
products, outcomes, and recommendations developed and endorsed by this community 
are expected to enhance data collection and management efforts for NIEHS and the 
EHS community, making data more findable and interoperable. This initiative will 
provide a community of practice space to exchange information and expertise, be 
a coordination hub for identifying and prioritizing activities, and a 
collaboration platform for the development and adoption of semantic solutions. 
We encourage anyone interested in advancing this mission to engage in this 
community.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18178985
PMCID: PMC8430534
PMID: 34501574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


40. Machine Learning Approaches for Biomarker Discovery Using Gene Expression Data.

Zhang X(1)(2), Jonassen I(2)(3), Goksøyr A(4).

In: Helder I. N(5), editor. Bioinformatics [Internet]. Brisbane (AU): Exon 
Publications; 2021 Mar 20. Chapter 4.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo 
University Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway
(2)Computational Biology Unit, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway
(3)Center for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Informatics, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
(5)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Biomarkers are of great importance in many fields, such as cancer research, 
toxicology, diagnosis and treatment of diseases, and to better understand 
biological response mechanisms to internal or external intervention. 
High-throughput gene expression profiling technologies, such as DNA microarrays 
and RNA sequencing, provide large gene expression data sets which enable 
data-driven biomarker discovery. Traditional statistical tests have been the 
mainstream for identifying differentially expressed genes as biomarkers. In 
recent years, machine learning techniques such as feature selection have gained 
more popularity. Given many options, picking the most appropriate method for a 
particular data becomes essential. Different evaluation metrics have therefore 
been proposed. Being evaluated on different aspects, a method’s varied 
performance across different datasets leads to the idea of integrating multiple 
methods. Many integration strategies are proposed and have shown great 
potential. This chapter gives an overview of the current research advances and 
existing issues in biomarker discovery using machine learning approaches on gene 
expression data.

Copyright: The Authors.

DOI: 10.36255/exonpublications.bioinformatics.2021.ch4
PMID: 33877765


41. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Jul;134:104469. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104469. 
Epub 2021 May 13.

Diagnosis of Acute Poisoning using explainable artificial intelligence.

Chary M(1), Boyer EW(2), Burns MM(3).

Author information:
(1)Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: mic9189@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Medical toxicology is the clinical specialty that treats the toxic 
effects of substances, for example, an overdose, a medication error, or a 
scorpion sting. The volume of toxicological knowledge and research has, as with 
other medical specialties, outstripped the ability of the individual clinician 
to entirely master and stay current with it. The application of machine 
learning/artificial intelligence (ML/AI) techniques to medical toxicology is 
challenging because initial treatment decisions are often based on a few pieces 
of textual data and rely heavily on experience and prior knowledge. ML/AI 
techniques, moreover, often do not represent knowledge in a way that is 
transparent for the physician, raising barriers to usability. Logic-based 
systems are more transparent approaches, but often generalize poorly and require 
expert curation to implement and maintain.
METHODS: We constructed a probabilistic logic network to model how a 
toxicologist recognizes a toxidrome, using only physical exam findings. Our 
approach transparently mimics the knowledge representation and decision-making 
of practicing clinicians. We created a library of 300 synthetic cases of varying 
clinical complexity. Each case contained 5 physical exam findings drawn from a 
mixture of 1 or 2 toxidromes. We used this library to evaluate the performance 
of our probabilistic logic network, dubbed Tak, against 2 medical toxicologists, 
a decision tree model, as well as its ability to recover the actual diagnosis.
RESULTS: The inter-rater reliability between Tak and the consensus of human 
raters was κ = 0.8432 for straightforward cases, 0.4396 for moderately complex 
cases, and 0.3331 for challenging cases. The inter-rater reliability between the 
decision tree classifier and the consensus of human raters was, κ = 0.2522 for 
straightforward cases, 0.1963 for moderately complex cases and 0.0331 for 
challenging cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The software, dubbed Tak, performs comparably to humans on 
straightforward cases and intermediate difficulty cases, but is outperformed by 
humans on challenging clinical cases. Tak outperforms a decision tree classifier 
at all levels of difficulty. Our results are a proof-of-concept that, in a 
restricted domain, probabilistic logic networks can perform medical reasoning 
comparably to humans.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104469
PMID: 34022488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Toxicol Pathol. 2021 Jun;49(4):784-797. doi: 10.1177/0192623321993425. Epub 2021 
Mar 3.

HistoNet: A Deep Learning-Based Model of Normal Histology.

Hoefling H(1), Sing T(1), Hossain I(1), Boisclair J(1), Doelemeyer A(1), Flandre 
T(1), Piaia A(1), Romanet V(1), Santarossa G(1), Saravanan C(2), Sutter E(1), 
Turner O(3), Wuersch K(1), Moulin P(1).

Author information:
(1)98560Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, the United 
States.
(3)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, East Hanover, NJ, the United 
States.

We introduce HistoNet, a deep neural network trained on normal tissue. On 1690 
slides with rat tissue samples from 6 preclinical toxicology studies, tissue 
regions were outlined and annotated by pathologists into 46 different tissue 
classes. From these annotated regions, we sampled small 224 × 224 pixels images 
(patches) at 6 different levels of magnification. Using 4 studies as training 
set and 2 studies as test set, we trained VGG-16, ResNet-50, and Inception-v3 
networks separately at each magnification level. Among these model 
architectures, Inception-v3 and ResNet-50 outperformed VGG-16. Inception-v3 
identified the tissue from query images, with an accuracy up to 83.4%. Most 
misclassifications occurred between histologically similar tissues. 
Investigation of the features learned by the model (embedding layer) using 
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection revealed not only coherent 
clusters associated with the individual tissues but also subclusters 
corresponding to histologically meaningful structures that had not been 
annotated or trained for. This suggests that the histological representation 
learned by HistoNet could be useful as the basis of other machine learning 
algorithms and data mining. Finally, we found that models trained on rat tissues 
can be used on non-human primate and minipig tissues with minimal retraining.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623321993425
PMID: 33653171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2425:497-518. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_19.

MultiCASE Platform for In Silico Toxicology.

Chakravarti SK(1), Saiakhov RD(2).

Author information:
(1)MultiCASE Inc, Beachwood, OH, USA. chakravarti@multicase.com.
(2)MultiCASE Inc, Beachwood, OH, USA.

Predictive and computational toxicology, a highly scientific and research-based 
field, is rapidly progressing with wider acceptance by regulatory agencies 
around the world. Almost every aspect of the field has seen fundamental changes 
during the last decade due to the availability of more data, usage, and 
acceptance of a variety of predictive tools and an increase in the overall 
awareness. Also, the influence from the recent explosive developments in the 
field of artificial intelligence has been significant. However, the need for 
sophisticated, easy to use and well-maintained software platforms for in silico 
toxicological assessments remains very high. The MultiCASE suite of software is 
one such platform that consists of an integrated collection of software 
programs, tools, and databases. While providing easy-to-use and highly useful 
tools that are relevant at present, it has always remained at the forefront of 
research and development by inventing new technologies and discovering new 
insights in the area of QSAR, artificial intelligence, and machine learning. 
This chapter gives the background, an overview of the software and databases 
involved, and a brief description of the usage methodology with the aid of 
examples.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_19
PMID: 35188644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Cheminform. 2017 Jun 28;9(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s13321-017-0226-y.

Deep-learning: investigating deep neural networks hyper-parameters and 
comparison of performance to shallow methods for modeling bioactivity data.

Koutsoukas A(1), Monaghan KJ(1), Li X(1), Huan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of 
Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66047-7621, USA.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of 
Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 66047-7621, USA. jhuan@ittc.ku.edu.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, research in artificial neural networks has 
resurged, now under the deep-learning umbrella, and grown extremely popular. 
Recently reported success of DL techniques in crowd-sourced QSAR and predictive 
toxicology competitions has showcased these methods as powerful tools in 
drug-discovery and toxicology research. The aim of this work was dual, first 
large number of hyper-parameter configurations were explored to investigate how 
they affect the performance of DNNs and could act as starting points when tuning 
DNNs and second their performance was compared to popular methods widely 
employed in the field of cheminformatics namely Naïve Bayes, k-nearest neighbor, 
random forest and support vector machines. Moreover, robustness of machine 
learning methods to different levels of artificially introduced noise was 
assessed. The open-source Caffe deep-learning framework and modern NVidia GPU 
units were utilized to carry out this study, allowing large number of DNN 
configurations to be explored.
RESULTS: We show that feed-forward deep neural networks are capable of achieving 
strong classification performance and outperform shallow methods across diverse 
activity classes when optimized. Hyper-parameters that were found to play 
critical role are the activation function, dropout regularization, number hidden 
layers and number of neurons. When compared to the rest methods, tuned DNNs were 
found to statistically outperform, with p value <0.01 based on Wilcoxon 
statistical test. DNN achieved on average MCC units of 0.149 higher than NB, 
0.092 than kNN, 0.052 than SVM with linear kernel, 0.021 than RF and finally 
0.009 higher than SVM with radial basis function kernel. When exploring 
robustness to noise, non-linear methods were found to perform well when dealing 
with low levels of noise, lower than or equal to 20%, however when dealing with 
higher levels of noise, higher than 30%, the Naïve Bayes method was found to 
perform well and even outperform at the highest level of noise 50% more 
sophisticated methods across several datasets.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-017-0226-y
PMCID: PMC5489441
PMID: 29086090


45. Chem Res Toxicol. 2022 Aug 15;35(8):1370-1382. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00074. Epub 2022 Jul 12.

Automating Predictive Toxicology Using ComptoxAI.

Romano JD(1)(2), Hao Y(1), Moore JH(3), Penning TM(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.
(2)Center of Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.
(3)Department of Computational Biomedicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, California 90069, United States.
(4)Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.

ComptoxAI is a new data infrastructure for computational and artificial 
intelligence research in predictive toxicology. Here, we describe and showcase 
ComptoxAI's graph-structured knowledge base in the context of three real-world 
use-cases, demonstrating that it can rapidly answer complex questions about 
toxicology that are infeasible using previous technologies and data resources. 
These use-cases each demonstrate a tool for information retrieval from the 
knowledge base being used to solve a specific task: The "shortest path" module 
is used to identify mechanistic links between perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 
exposure and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; the "expand network" module 
identifies communities that are linked to dioxin toxicity; and the quantitative 
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) dataset generator predicts pregnane X 
receptor agonism in a set of 4,021 pesticide ingredients. The contents of 
ComptoxAI's source data are rigorously aggregated from a diverse array of public 
third-party databases, and ComptoxAI is designed as a free, public, and 
open-source toolkit to enable diverse classes of users including biomedical 
researchers, public health and regulatory officials, and the general public to 
predict toxicology of unknowns and modes of action.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00074
PMID: 35819939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Future Med Chem. 2011 Mar;3(4):451-67. doi: 10.4155/fmc.11.11.

Informatics, machine learning and computational medicinal chemistry.

Mitchell JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St 
Andrews KY16 9ST, UK. jbom@st-andrews.ac.uk

This article reviews the use of informatics and computational chemistry methods 
in medicinal chemistry, with special consideration of how computational 
techniques can be adapted and extended to obtain more and higher-quality 
information. Special consideration is given to the computation of protein-ligand 
binding affinities, to the prediction of off-target bioactivities, bioactivity 
spectra and computational toxicology, and also to calculating absorption-, 
distribution-, metabolism- and excretion-relevant properties, such as 
solubility.

DOI: 10.4155/fmc.11.11
PMID: 21452981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2390:483-501. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1787-8_22.

Artificial Intelligence in Drug Safety and Metabolism.

Smith GF(1).

Author information:
(1)Imaging & Data Analytics, Clinical Pharmacology & Safety Sciences, R&D, 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK. graham.smith@astrazeneca.com.

The use of artificial intelligence methods in drug safety began in the early 
2000s with applications such as predicting bacterial mutagenicity and hERG 
inhibition. The field has been endlessly expanding ever since and the models 
have become more complex. These approaches are now integrated into molecule risk 
assessment processes along with in vitro and in vivo methods. Today, artificial 
intelligence can be used in every phase of drug discovery and development, from 
profiling chemical libraries in early discovery, to predicting off-target 
effects in the mid-discovery phase, to assessing potential mutagenic impurities 
in development and degradants as part of life cycle management. This chapter 
provides an overview of artificial intelligence in drug safety and describes its 
application throughout the entire discovery and development process.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1787-8_22
PMID: 34731484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Chem Biol Interact. 2021 Aug 25;345:109533. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2021.109533. Epub 
2021 May 27.

Application of artificial intelligence for detection of chemico-biological 
interactions associated with oxidative stress and DNA damage.

Davidovic LM(1), Laketic D(2), Cumic J(3), Jordanova E(4), Pantic I(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 1, RS-11000, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Anatomy "Niko 
Miljanić", Dr. Subotica 4/2, RS-11129, Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Center of Serbia, Dr. 
Koste Todorovića 8, RS-11129, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Hospital Centre, Zemun, 
Vukova 9, RS-11000, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical Physiology, 
Laboratory for Cellular Physiology, Visegradska 26/II, RS-11129, Belgrade, 
Serbia; University of Haifa, 199 Abba Hushi Blvd. Mount Carmel, Haifa, 
IL-3498838, Israel. Electronic address: igorpantic@gmail.com.

In recent years, various AI-based methods have been developed in order to 
uncover chemico-biological interactions associated with DNA damage and oxidative 
stress. Various decision trees, bayesian networks, random forests, logistic 
regression models, support vector machines as well as deep learning tools, have 
great potential in the area of molecular biology and toxicology, and it is 
estimated that in the future, they will greatly contribute to our understanding 
of molecular and cellular mechanisms associated with DNA damage and repair. In 
this concise review, we discuss recent attempts to build machine learning tools 
for assessment of radiation - induced DNA damage as well as algorithms that can 
analyze the data from the most frequently used DNA damage assays in molecular 
biology. We also review recent works on the detection of antioxidant proteins 
with machine learning, and the use of AI-related methods for prediction and 
evaluation of noncoding DNA sequences. Finally, we discuss previously published 
research on the potential application of machine learning tools in aging 
research.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2021.109533
PMID: 34051207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 May 17;34(5):1296-1307. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00466. Epub 2021 Jan 5.

The Antiviral Drug Tilorone Is a Potent and Selective Inhibitor of 
Acetylcholinesterase.

Vignaux PA(1), Minerali E(1), Lane TR(1), Foil DH(1), Madrid PB(2), Puhl AC(1), 
Ekins S(1).

Author information:
(1)Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 840 Main Campus Drive, Lab 3510, 
Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, United States.
(2)SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, California 94025, 
United States.

Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is an important drug target in neurological 
disorders like Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body dementia, and Parkinson's disease 
dementia as well as for other conditions like myasthenia gravis and 
anticholinergic poisoning. In this study, we have used a combination of 
high-throughput screening, machine learning, and docking to identify new 
inhibitors of this enzyme. Bayesian machine learning models were generated with 
literature data from ChEMBL for eel and human AChE inhibitors as well as 
butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors (BuChE) and compared with other machine 
learning methods. High-throughput screens for the eel AChE inhibitor model 
identified several molecules including tilorone, an antiviral drug that is 
well-established outside of the United States, as a newly identified nanomolar 
AChE inhibitor. We have described how tilorone inhibits both eel and human AChE 
with IC50's of 14.4 nM and 64.4 nM, respectively, but does not inhibit the 
closely related BuChE IC50 > 50 μM. We have docked tilorone into the human AChE 
crystal structure and shown that this selectivity is likely due to the reliance 
on a specific interaction with a hydrophobic residue in the peripheral anionic 
site of AChE that is absent in BuChE. We also conducted a pharmacological safety 
profile (SafetyScreen44) and kinase selectivity screen (SelectScreen) that 
showed tilorone (1 μM) only inhibited AChE out of 44 toxicology target proteins 
evaluated and did not appreciably inhibit any of the 485 kinases tested. This 
study suggests there may be a potential role for repurposing tilorone or its 
derivatives in conditions that benefit from AChE inhibition.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00466
PMCID: PMC8215598
PMID: 33400519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest SE is founder and owner of 
Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc. PAV, ACP, DHF, TRL and EM are employees of 
Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Collaborations Pharmaceuticals Inc. has 
submitted a provisional patent to cover uses of tilorone as an AChE inhibitor. 
PBM has no conflicts of interest.


50. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2020 Nov 15;407:115244. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115244. 
Epub 2020 Sep 19.

NURA: A curated dataset of nuclear receptor modulators.

Valsecchi C(1), Grisoni F(2), Motta S(1), Bonati L(1), Ballabio D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
P.za della Scienza 1, 20126 Milano, Italy.
(2)ETH Zurich, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, RETHINK, 
Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, 8049 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
francesca.grisoni@pharma.ethz.ch.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) are key regulators of human health and constitute a 
relevant target for medicinal chemistry applications as well as for 
toxicological risk assessment. Several open databases dedicated to small 
molecules that modulate NRs exist; however, depending on their final aim (i.e., 
adverse effect assessment or drug design), these databases contain a different 
amount and type of annotated molecules, along with a different distribution of 
experimental bioactivity values. Stemming from these considerations, in this 
work we aim to provide a unified dataset, NURA (NUclear Receptor Activity) 
dataset, collecting curated information on small molecules that modulate NRs, to 
be intended for both pharmacological and toxicological applications. NURA 
contains bioactivity annotations for 15,247 molecules and 11 selected NRs, and 
it was obtained by integrating and curating data from toxicological and 
pharmacological databases (i.e., Tox21, ChEMBL, NR-DBIND and BindingDB). Our 
results show that NURA dataset is a useful tool to bridge the gap between 
toxicology- and medicinal-chemistry-related databases, as it is enriched in 
terms of number of molecules, structural diversity and covered atomic scaffolds 
compared to the single sources. To the best of our knowledge, NURA dataset is 
the most exhaustive collection of small molecules annotated for their modulation 
of the chosen nuclear receptors. NURA dataset is intended to support 
decision-making in pharmacology and toxicology, as well as to contribute to 
data-driven applications, such as machine learning. The dataset and the data 
curation pipeline can be downloaded free of charge on Zenodo at the following 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3991561.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115244
PMID: 32961130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Small Methods. 2021 Jul;5(7):e2100223. doi: 10.1002/smtd.202100223. Epub 2021 
May 3.

Synthetic Image Rendering Solves Annotation Problem in Deep Learning 
Nanoparticle Segmentation.

Mill L(1)(2), Wolff D(3), Gerrits N(4), Philipp P(5), Kling L(3), Vollnhals 
F(2)(3), Ignatenko A(5), Jaremenko C(1)(3), Huang Y(1)(3), De Castro O(5), 
Audinot JN(5), Nelissen I(4), Wirtz T(5), Maier A(1), Christiansen S(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Pattern Recognition Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
91058, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Optics, Information and Photonics, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Institut für Nanotechnologie und korrelative Mikroskopie, 91301, Forchheim, 
Germany.
(4)Health Unit, Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Mol, 2400, 
Belgium.
(5)Advanced Instrumentation for Ion Nano-Analytics, Materials Research and 
Technology Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Belvaux, 
L-4422, Luxembourg.
(6)Physics Department, Free University, 14195, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Correlative Microscopy and Material Data Department, Fraunhofer Institute for 
Ceramic Technologies and Systems, 01277, Dresden, Germany.

Nanoparticles occur in various environments as a consequence of man-made 
processes, which raises concerns about their impact on the environment and human 
health. To allow for proper risk assessment, a precise and statistically 
relevant analysis of particle characteristics (such as size, shape, and 
composition) is required that would greatly benefit from automated image 
analysis procedures. While deep learning shows impressive results in object 
detection tasks, its applicability is limited by the amount of representative, 
experimentally collected and manually annotated training data. Here, an elegant, 
flexible, and versatile method to bypass this costly and tedious data 
acquisition process is presented. It shows that using a rendering software 
allows to generate realistic, synthetic training data to train a state-of-the 
art deep neural network. Using this approach, a segmentation accuracy can be 
derived that is comparable to man-made annotations for toxicologically relevant 
metal-oxide nanoparticle ensembles which were chosen as examples. The presented 
study paves the way toward the use of deep learning for automated, 
high-throughput particle detection in a variety of imaging techniques such as in 
microscopies and spectroscopies, for a wide range of applications, including the 
detection of micro- and nanoplastic particles in water and tissue samples.

© 2021 The Authors. Small Methods published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/smtd.202100223
PMID: 34927995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chem Res Toxicol. 2020 Jun 15;33(6):1312-1322. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00006. Epub 2020 Mar 5.

Computational Approaches to Identify Structural Alerts and Their Applications in 
Environmental Toxicology and Drug Discovery.

Yang H(1), Lou C(1), Li W(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China.

Structural alerts are a simple and easy way to identify toxic compounds being 
widely used in environmental toxicology research and drug discovery. With the 
emergence of big data techniques in recent years and their applications in 
chemistry and toxicology, computational approaches have become a promising 
method to identify structural alerts. In this Review, we describe the recent 
progress in computational methods for identification of structural alerts and 
their applications in toxicology. Two major computational approaches, namely 
frequency analysis and interpretable machine learning models, are reviewed. 
Recent studies have shown that both approaches are superior to expert systems 
with respect to predictive capability. Methodologies for defining the 
applicability domain of such approaches are also reviewed, with their importance 
stemming from their ability to not only improve the predictive performance of 
structural alert models but also ensure the confidence of a prediction. In 
addition to toxicity prediction, structural alerts could be also used to explain 
quantitative structure-activity relationship models and guide lead optimization 
in drug discovery. Nevertheless, there are still some challenges to be solved, 
such as how to address the co-existence of several structural alerts in one 
molecule, how to directly compare computationally derived structural alerts with 
expert systems, and how to explore new mechanisms of toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00006
PMID: 32091207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Apr 26;61(4):1691-1700. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01294. 
Epub 2021 Mar 15.

GGL-Tox: Geometric Graph Learning for Toxicity Prediction.

Jiang J(1), Wang R(2), Wei GW(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Nonlinear Science, College of Mathematics and Computer 
Science, Engineering Research Center of Hubei Province for Clothing Information, 
Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan 430200, P R. China.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 
48824, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States.
(4)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States.

Toxicity analysis is a major challenge in drug design and discovery. Recently 
significant progress has been made through machine learning due to its accuracy, 
efficiency, and lower cost. US Toxicology in the 21st Century (Tox21) screened a 
large library of compounds, including approximately 12 000 environmental 
chemicals and drugs, for different mechanisms responsible for eliciting toxic 
effects. The Tox21 Data Challenge offered a platform to evaluate different 
computational methods for toxicity predictions. Inspired by the success of 
multiscale weighted colored graph (MWCG) theory in protein-ligand binding 
affinity predictions, we consider MWCG theory for toxicity analysis. In the 
present work, we develop a geometric graph learning toxicity (GGL-Tox) model by 
integrating MWCG features and the gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) 
algorithm. The benchmark tests of the Tox21 Data Challenge are employed to 
demonstrate the utility and usefulness of the proposed GGL-Tox model. An 
extensive comparison with other state-of-the-art models indicates that GGL-Tox 
is an accurate and efficient model for toxicity analysis and prediction.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01294
PMCID: PMC8155789
PMID: 33719422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Chem Res Toxicol. 2019 Apr 15;32(4):536-547. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.8b00393. Epub 2019 Mar 25.

Advancing Computational Toxicology in the Big Data Era by Artificial 
Intelligence: Data-Driven and Mechanism-Driven Modeling for Chemical Toxicity.

Ciallella HL, Zhu H.

In 2016, the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act became 
the first US legislation to advance chemical safety evaluations by utilizing 
novel testing approaches that reduce the testing of vertebrate animals. Central 
to this mission is the advancement of computational toxicology and artificial 
intelligence approaches to implementing innovative testing methods. In the 
current big data era, the terms volume (amount of data), velocity (growth of 
data), and variety (the diversity of sources) have been used to characterize the 
currently available chemical, in vitro, and in vivo data for toxicity modeling 
purposes. Furthermore, as suggested by various scientists, the variability 
(internal consistency or lack thereof) of publicly available data pools, such as 
PubChem, also presents significant computational challenges. The development of 
novel artificial intelligence approaches based on public massive toxicity data 
is urgently needed to generate new predictive models for chemical toxicity 
evaluations and make the developed models applicable as alternatives for 
evaluating untested compounds. In this procedure, traditional approaches (e.g., 
QSAR) purely based on chemical structures have been replaced by newly designed 
data-driven and mechanism-driven modeling. The resulting models realize the 
concept of adverse outcome pathway (AOP), which can not only directly evaluate 
toxicity potentials of new compounds, but also illustrate relevant toxicity 
mechanisms. The recent advancement of computational toxicology in the big data 
era has paved the road to future toxicity testing, which will significantly 
impact on the public health.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.8b00393
PMCID: PMC6688471
PMID: 30907586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


55. Chem Commun (Camb). 2021 Oct 19;57(83):10842-10866. doi: 10.1039/d1cc04083a.

The emergence of the C-H functionalization strategy in medicinal chemistry and 
drug discovery.

Jana R(1), Begam HM(1), Dinda E(2).

Author information:
(1)Organic and Medicinal Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata-700032, India. rjana@iicb.res.in.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Environment, Heritage Institute of Technology, 
Kolkata-700107, India.

Owing to the market competitiveness and urgent societal need, an optimum speed 
of drug discovery is an important criterion for successful implementation. 
Despite the rapid ascent of artificial intelligence and computational and 
bioanalytical techniques to accelerate drug discovery in big pharma, organic 
synthesis of privileged scaffolds predicted in silico for in vitro and in vivo 
studies is still considered as the rate-limiting step. C-H activation is the 
latest technology added into an organic chemist's toolbox for the rapid 
construction and late-stage modification of functional molecules to achieve the 
desired chemical and physical properties. Particularly, elimination of 
prefunctionalization steps, exceptional functional group tolerance, 
complexity-to-diversity oriented synthesis, and late-stage functionalization of 
privileged medicinal scaffolds expand the chemical space. It has immense 
potential for the rapid synthesis of a library of molecules, structural 
modification to achieve the required pharmacological properties such as 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicology (ADMET) and 
attachment of chemical reporters for proteome profiling, metabolite synthesis, 
etc. for preclinical studies. Although heterocycle synthesis, late-stage drug 
modification, 18F labelling, methylation, etc. via C-H functionalization have 
been reviewed from the synthetic standpoint, a general overview of these 
protocols from medicinal and drug discovery aspects has not been reviewed. In 
this feature article, we will discuss the recent trends of C-H activation 
methodologies such as synthesis of medicinal scaffolds through C-H 
activation/annulation cascade; C-H arylation for sp2-sp2 and sp2-sp3 
cross-coupling; C-H borylation/silylation to introduce a functional linchpin for 
further manipulation; C-H amination for N-heterocycles and hydrogen bond 
acceptors; C-H fluorination/fluoroalkylation to tune polarity and lipophilicity; 
C-H methylation: methyl magic in drug discovery; peptide modification and 
macrocyclization for therapeutics and biologics; fluorescent labelling and 
radiolabelling for bioimaging; bioconjugation for chemical biology studies; 
drug-metabolite synthesis for biodistribution and excretion studies; late-stage 
diversification of drug-molecules to increase efficacy and safety; cutting-edge 
DNA encoded library synthesis and improved synthesis of drug molecules via C-H 
activation in medicinal chemistry and drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1039/d1cc04083a
PMID: 34596175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2021 Jan;17(1):53-61. doi: 10.1002/ieam.4369. Epub 
2020 Dec 11.

Increased Use of Bayesian Network Models Has Improved Environmental Risk 
Assessments.

Moe SJ(1), Carriger JF(2), Glendell M(3).

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Institute for Water Research (NIVA), Oslo, Norway.
(2)United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and 
Development, Center for Environmental Solutions and Emergency Response, Land 
Remediation and Technology Division, Environmental Decision Analytics Branch, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(3)James Hutton Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

Environmental and ecological risk assessments are defined as the process for 
evaluating the likelihood that the environment may be impacted as a result of 
exposure to stressors. Although this definition implies the calculation of 
probabilities, risk assessments traditionally rely on nonprobabilistic methods 
such as calculation of a risk quotient. Bayesian network (BN) models are a tool 
for probabilistic and causal modeling, increasingly used in many fields of 
environmental science. Bayesian networks are defined as directed acyclic graphs 
where the causal relationships and the associated uncertainty are quantified in 
conditional probability tables. Bayesian networks inherently incorporate 
uncertainty and can integrate a variety of information types, including expert 
elicitation. During the last 2 decades, there has been a steady increase in 
reports on BN applications in environmental risk assessment and management. At 
recent annual meetings of the Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 
(SETAC) North America and SETAC Europe, a number of applications of BN models 
were presented along with new theoretical developments. Likewise, recent 
meetings of the European Geosciences Union (EGU) have dedicated sessions to 
Bayesian modeling in relation to water quality. This special series contains 10 
articles based on presentations in these sessions, reflecting a range of BN 
applications to systems, ranging from cells and populations to watersheds and 
national scale. The articles report on recent progress in many topics, including 
climate and management scenarios, ecological and socioeconomic endpoints, 
machine learning, diagnostic inference, and model evaluation. They demonstrate 
that BNs can be adapted to established conceptual frameworks used to support 
environmental risk assessments, such as adverse outcome pathways and the 
relative risk model. The contributions from EGU demonstrate recent advancements 
in areas such as spatial (geographic information system [GIS]-based) and 
temporal (dynamic) BN modeling. In conclusion, this special series supports the 
prediction that increased use of Bayesian network models will improve 
environmental risk assessments. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2021;17:53-61. © 
2020 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

© 2020 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.4369
PMCID: PMC8573810
PMID: 33205856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2020 Jul;34(7):731-746. doi: 10.1007/s10822-020-00310-4. 
Epub 2020 Apr 16.

Revealing cytotoxic substructures in molecules using deep learning.

Webel HE(1), Kimber TB(1), Radetzki S(2), Neuenschwander M(2), Nazaré M(2), 
Volkamer A(3).

Author information:
(1)In silico Toxicology and Structural Bioinformatics, Institute of Physiology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Roessle 
Strasse 10, 13125, Berlin, Germany.
(3)In silico Toxicology and Structural Bioinformatics, Institute of Physiology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany. 
andrea.volkamer@charite.de.

In drug development, late stage toxicity issues of a compound are the main cause 
of failure in clinical trials. In silico methods are therefore of high 
importance to guide the early design process to reduce time, costs and animal 
testing. Technical advances and the ever growing amount of available toxicity 
data enabled machine learning, especially neural networks, to impact the field 
of predictive toxicology. In this study, cytotoxicity prediction, one of the 
earliest handles in drug discovery, is investigated using a deep learning 
approach trained on a highly consistent in-house data set of over 34,000 
compounds with a share of less than 5% of cytotoxic molecules. The model reached 
a balanced accuracy of over 70%, similar to previously reported studies using 
Random Forest. Albeit yielding good results, neural networks are often described 
as a black box lacking deeper mechanistic understanding of the underlying model. 
To overcome this absence of interpretability, a Deep Taylor Decomposition method 
is investigated to identify substructures that may be responsible for the 
cytotoxic effects, the so-called toxicophores. Furthermore, this study 
introduces cytotoxicity maps which provide a visual structural interpretation of 
the relevance of these substructures. Using this approach could be helpful in 
drug development to predict the potential toxicity of a compound as well as to 
generate new insights into the toxic mechanism. Moreover, it could also help to 
de-risk and optimize compounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s10822-020-00310-4
PMCID: PMC7292813
PMID: 32297073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


58. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2017 Jul;58(6):390-397. doi: 10.1002/em.22105. Epub 2017 
Jun 24.

Three lessons for genetic toxicology from baseball analytics.

Dertinger SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Litron Laboratories, Rochester, New York.

In many respects the evolution of baseball statistics mirrors advances made in 
the field of genetic toxicology. From its inception, baseball and statistics 
have been inextricably linked. Generations of players and fans have used a 
number of relatively simple measurements to describe team and individual 
player's current performance, as well as for historical record-keeping purposes. 
Over the years, baseball analytics has progressed in several important ways. 
Early advances were based on deriving more meaningful metrics from simpler 
forerunners. Now, technological innovations are delivering much deeper insights. 
Videography, radar, and other advances that include automatic player recognition 
capabilities provide the means to measure more complex and useful factors. 
Fielders' reaction times, efficiency of the route taken to reach a batted ball, 
and pitch-framing effectiveness come to mind. With the current availability of 
complex measurements from multiple data streams, multifactorial analyses 
occurring via machine learning algorithms have become necessary to make sense of 
the terabytes of data that are now being captured in every Major League Baseball 
game. Collectively, these advances have transformed baseball statistics from 
being largely descriptive in nature to serving data-driven, predictive roles. 
Whereas genetic toxicology has charted a somewhat parallel course, a case can be 
made that greater utilization of baseball's mindset and strategies would serve 
our scientific field well. This paper describes three useful lessons for genetic 
toxicology, courtesy of the field of baseball analytics: seek objective 
knowledge; incorporate multiple data streams; and embrace machine learning. 
Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 58:390-397, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22105
PMID: 28646506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2020 Aug;16(8):651-662. doi: 
10.1080/17425255.2020.1785428. Epub 2020 Jun 28.

In silico models for genotoxicity and drug regulation.

Benigni R(1), Bassan A(2), Pavan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Alpha-PreTox , Rome, Italy.
(2)Innovatune Srl , Padova, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Whereas in the past, (Q)SAR methods have been largely used to 
support the design of new drugs, in the last few decades, there has been a new 
interest in its applications for the assessment of drug safety. In particular, 
the ICH M7 guideline has introduced the concept that (Q)SAR predictions for the 
Ames mutagenicity of drug impurities can be used for regulatory purposes.
AREAS COVERED: This review introduces the ICH M7 conceptual framework and 
illustrates the most updated evaluations of the in silico approaches for the 
prediction of genotoxicity. The strengths and weaknesses of the state-of-the-art 
are presented and future perspectives are discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: Given the growing recognition of (Q)SAR approaches, more 
investment will be devoted to its improvement. The major areas of research 
should be the expansion and curation of the experimental training sets, with 
particular attention to the portions of chemical space which are poorly 
represented. New modeling methodologies (e.g. machine-learning methods) may 
support this effort, particularly for treating proprietary data without 
disclosure. Research on new integrative approaches for regulatory decisions will 
also be important.

DOI: 10.1080/17425255.2020.1785428
PMID: 32567390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Arch Toxicol. 2021 Sep;95(9):3101-3115. doi: 10.1007/s00204-021-03113-0. Epub 
2021 Jul 10.

Inter-laboratory automation of the in vitro micronucleus assay using imaging 
flow cytometry and deep learning.

Wills JW(1)(2), Verma JR(3), Rees BJ(3), Harte DSG(3), Haxhiraj Q(3), Barnes 
CM(4), Barnes R(3), Rodrigues MA(5), Doan M(6), Filby A(7), Hewitt RE(8), 
Thornton CA(3), Cronin JG(3), Kenny JD(9), Buckley R(9), Lynch AM(3)(9), 
Carpenter AE(10), Summers HD(4), Johnson GE(#)(11), Rees P(#)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)College of Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, UK. jw2020@cam.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK. 
jw2020@cam.ac.uk.
(3)Swansea University Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(4)College of Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(5)Amnis Flow Cytometry, Luminex Corporation, Seattle, WAS, USA.
(6)Bioimaging Analytics, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.
(9)GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development Platform, Ware, UK.
(10)Imaging Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Swansea University Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, UK. 
g.johnson@swan.ac.uk.
(12)College of Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, UK. p.rees@swan.ac.uk.
(13)Imaging Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
p.rees@swan.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

The in vitro micronucleus assay is a globally significant method for DNA damage 
quantification used for regulatory compound safety testing in addition to 
inter-individual monitoring of environmental, lifestyle and occupational 
factors. However, it relies on time-consuming and user-subjective manual 
scoring. Here we show that imaging flow cytometry and deep learning image 
classification represents a capable platform for automated, inter-laboratory 
operation. Images were captured for the cytokinesis-block micronucleus (CBMN) 
assay across three laboratories using methyl methanesulphonate (1.25-5.0 μg/mL) 
and/or carbendazim (0.8-1.6 μg/mL) exposures to TK6 cells. Human-scored image 
sets were assembled and used to train and test the classification abilities of 
the "DeepFlow" neural network in both intra- and inter-laboratory contexts. 
Harnessing image diversity across laboratories yielded a network able to score 
unseen data from an entirely new laboratory without any user configuration. 
Image classification accuracies of 98%, 95%, 82% and 85% were achieved for 
'mononucleates', 'binucleates', 'mononucleates with MN' and 'binucleates with 
MN', respectively. Successful classifications of 'trinucleates' (90%) and 
'tetranucleates' (88%) in addition to 'other or unscorable' phenotypes (96%) 
were also achieved. Attempts to classify extremely rare, tri- and tetranucleated 
cells with micronuclei into their own categories were less successful (≤ 57%). 
Benchmark dose analyses of human or automatically scored micronucleus frequency 
data yielded quantitation of the same equipotent concentration regardless of 
scoring method. We conclude that this automated approach offers significant 
potential to broaden the practical utility of the CBMN method across industry, 
research and clinical domains. We share our strategy using openly-accessible 
frameworks.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-021-03113-0
PMCID: PMC8380241
PMID: 34245348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M. A. R., is an employee of Luminex Corporation 
which manufactures the Amnis ImageStream imaging flow cytometers used in this 
research study.


61. ALTEX. 2017;34(4):459-478. doi: 10.14573/altex.1710141.

Computational approaches to chemical hazard assessment.

Luechtefeld T(1), Hartung T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing (CAAT), Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(2)CAAT-Europe, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Computational prediction of toxicity has reached new heights as a result of 
decades of growth in the magnitude and diversity of biological data. Public 
packages for statistics and machine learning make model creation faster. New 
theory in machine learning and cheminformatics enables integration of chemical 
structure, toxicogenomics, simulated and physical data in the prediction of 
chemical health hazards, and other toxicological information. Our earlier 
publications have characterized a toxicological dataset of unprecedented scale 
resulting from the European REACH legislation (Registration Evaluation 
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals). These publications dove into 
potential use cases for regulatory data and some models for exploiting this 
data. This article analyzes the options for the identification and 
categorization of chemicals, moves on to the derivation of descriptive features 
for chemicals, discusses different kinds of targets modeled in computational 
toxicology, and ends with a high-level perspective of the algorithms used to 
create computational toxicology models.

DOI: 10.14573/altex.1710141
PMCID: PMC5848496
PMID: 29101769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors consult 
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) on computational toxicology, especially 
read-across, and have a share of their respective sales. Tom Luechtefeld has 
created ToxTrack LLC to develop such computational tools.


62. J Chem Inf Model. 2020 Mar 23;60(3):1111-1121. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00713. 
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Image Based Liver Toxicity Prediction.

Asilar E(1), Hemmerich J(1), Ecker GF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 
14, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The drugs we use to cure our diseases can cause damage to the liver as it is the 
primary organ responsible for metabolism of environmental chemicals and drugs. 
To identify and eliminate potentially problematic drug candidates in the early 
stages of drug discovery, in silico techniques provide quick and practical 
solutions for toxicity determination. Deep learning has emerged as one of the 
solutions in recent years in the field of pharmaceutical chemistry. Generally, 
in the case of small data sets as used in toxicology, these data-hungry 
algorithms are prone to overfitting. We approach the problem from two sides. 
First, we use images of the three-dimensional conformations and benefit from 
convolutional neural networks which have fewer parameters than the standard deep 
neural networks with similar depth. Using images allows connecting various 
chemical features to the geometry of the compounds. Second, we employ the method 
COVER to up-sample the data set. It is used not only for increasing the size of 
the data set, but also for balancing the two classes, i.e., toxic and not toxic. 
The proof of concept is performed on the p53 end point from the Tox21 data set. 
The results, which are compatible with the winners of the data challenge, 
encouraged us to use our methods to predict liver toxicity. We use the most 
extensive publicly available liver toxicity data set by Mulliner et al. and 
obtain a sensitivity of 0.79 and a specificity of 0.52. These results 
demonstrate the applicability of image based toxicity prediction using deep 
neural networks.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00713
PMID: 31978306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Can J Cardiol. 2022 Feb;38(2):234-245. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2021.11.008. Epub 
2021 Nov 20.

The Role of Machine Learning in Cardiovascular Pathology.

Glass C(1), Lafata KJ(2), Jeck W(3), Horstmeyer R(4), Cooke C(5), Everitt J(3), 
Glass M(6), Dov D(7), Seidman MA(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Artificial Intelligence and Computational Pathology, Duke AI 
Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Department 
of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. 
Electronic address: carolyn.glass@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Duke Pratt School of Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Division of Artificial Intelligence and Computational Pathology, Duke AI 
Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Department 
of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Division of Artificial Intelligence and Computational Pathology, Duke AI 
Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, Duke Pratt School of Engineering, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke Pratt School of 
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Division of Artificial Intelligence and Computational Pathology, Duke AI 
Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Department 
of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Division of Artificial Intelligence and Computational Pathology, Duke AI 
Health, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA; Tel-Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(8)Laboratory Medicine Program, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Machine learning has seen slow but steady uptake in diagnostic pathology over 
the past decade to assess digital whole-slide images. Machine learning tools 
have incredible potential to standardise, and likely even improve, 
histopathologic diagnoses, but they are not yet widely used in clinical 
practice. We describe the principles of these tools and technologies and some 
successful preclinical and pretranslational efforts in cardiovascular pathology, 
as well as a roadmap for moving forward. In nonhuman animal models, one 
proof-of-principle application is in rodent progressive cardiomyopathy, which is 
of particular significance to drug toxicity studies. Basic science successes 
include screening the quality of differentiated stem cells and characterising 
cardiomyocyte developmental stages, with potential applications for research and 
toxicology/drug safety screening using derived or native human pluripotent stem 
cells differentiated into cardiomyocytes. Translational studies of particular 
note include those with success in diagnosing the various forms of heart 
allograft rejection. For fully realising the value of these tools in clinical 
cardiovascular pathology, we identify 3 essential challenges. First is image 
quality standardisation to ensure that algorithms can be developed and 
implemented on robust, consistent data. The second is consensus diagnosis; 
experts don't always agree, and thus "truth" may be difficult to establish, but 
the algorithms themselves may provide a solution. The third is the need for 
large-enough data sets to facilitate robust algorithm development, necessitating 
large cross-institutional shared image databases. The power of 
histopathology-based machine learning technologies is tremendous, and we outline 
the next steps needed to capitalise on this power.

Copyright © 2021 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2021.11.008
PMID: 34813876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. AAPS J. 2012 Sep;14(3):473-80. doi: 10.1208/s12248-012-9358-1. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Paradigm shift in toxicity testing and modeling.

Sun H(1), Xia M, Austin CP, Huang R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, NIH Chemical Genomics Center, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-3370, USA. 
hongmao.sun@nih.gov

The limitations of traditional toxicity testing characterized by high-cost 
animal models with low-throughput readouts, inconsistent responses, ethical 
issues, and extrapolability to humans call for alternative strategies for 
chemical risk assessment. A new strategy using in vitro human cell-based assays 
has been designed to identify key toxicity pathways and molecular mechanisms 
leading to the prediction of an in vivo response. The emergence of quantitative 
high-throughput screening (qHTS) technology has proved to be an efficient way to 
decompose complex toxicological end points to specific pathways of targeted 
organs. In addition, qHTS has made a significant impact on computational 
toxicology in two aspects. First, the ease of mechanism of action identification 
brought about by in vitro assays has enhanced the simplicity and effectiveness 
of machine learning, and second, the high-throughput nature and high 
reproducibility of qHTS have greatly improved the data quality and increased the 
quantity of training datasets available for predictive model construction. In 
this review, the benefits of qHTS routinely used in the US Tox21 program will be 
highlighted. Quantitative structure-activity relationships models built on 
traditional in vivo data and new qHTS data will be compared and analyzed. In 
conjunction with the transition from the pilot phase to the production phase of 
the Tox21 program, more qHTS data will be made available that will enrich the 
data pool for predictive toxicology. It is perceivable that new in silico 
toxicity models based on high-quality qHTS data will achieve unprecedented 
reliability and robustness, thus becoming a valuable tool for risk assessment 
and drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1208/s12248-012-9358-1
PMCID: PMC3385826
PMID: 22528508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Front Chem. 2019 May 10;7:319. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00319. eCollection 2019.

Metabolomic Strategies in Biomarker Research-New Approach for Indirect 
Identification of Drug Consumption and Sample Manipulation in Clinical and 
Forensic Toxicology?

Steuer AE(1), Brockbals L(1), Kraemer T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich Institute of 
Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Drug of abuse (DOA) consumption is a growing problem worldwide, particularly 
with increasing numbers of new psychoactive substances (NPS) entering the drug 
market. Generally, little information on their adverse effects and toxicity are 
available. The direct detection and identification of NPS is an analytical 
challenge due to their ephemerality on the drug scene. An approach that does not 
directly focus on the structural detection of an analyte or its metabolites, 
would be beneficial for this complex analytical scenario and the development of 
alternative screening methods could help to provide fast response on suspected 
NPS consumption. A metabolomics approach might represent such an alternative 
strategy for the identification of biomarkers for different questions in DOA 
testing. Metabolomics is the monitoring of changes in small (endogenous) 
molecules (<1,000 Da) in response to a certain stimulus, e.g., DOA consumption. 
For this review, a literature search targeting "metabolomics" and different DOAs 
or NPS was conducted. Thereby, different applications of metabolomic strategies 
in biomarker research for DOA identification were identified: (a) as an 
additional tool for metabolism studies bearing the major advantage that 
particularly a priori unknown or unexpected metabolites can be identified; and 
(b) for identification of endogenous biomarker or metabolite patterns, e.g., for 
synthetic cannabinoids or also to indirectly detect urine manipulation attempts 
by chemical adulteration or replacement with artificial urine samples. The 
majority of the currently available literature in that field, however, deals 
with metabolomic studies for DOAs to better assess their acute or chronic 
effects or to find biomarkers for drug addiction and tolerance. Certain changes 
in endogenous compounds are detected for all studied DOAs, but often similar 
compounds/pathways are influenced. When evaluating these studies with regard to 
possible biomarkers for drug consumption, the observed changes appear, albeit 
statistically significant, too small to reliably work as biomarker for drug 
consumption. Further, different drugs were shown to affect the same pathways. In 
conclusion, metabolomic approaches possess potential for detection of biomarkers 
indicating drug consumption. More studies, including more sensitive targeted 
analyses, multi-variant statistical models or deep-learning approaches are 
needed to fully explore the potential of omics science in DOA testing.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00319
PMCID: PMC6523029
PMID: 31134189


66. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2020 Mar 7;18:583-602. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2020.02.023. eCollection 2020.

NanoSolveIT Project: Driving nanoinformatics research to develop innovative and 
integrated tools for in silico nanosafety assessment.

Afantitis A(1), Melagraki G(1), Isigonis P(1), Tsoumanis A(1), Varsou DD(1), 
Valsami-Jones E(2), Papadiamantis A(2), Ellis LA(2), Sarimveis H(3), Doganis 
P(3), Karatzas P(3), Tsiros P(3), Liampa I(3), Lobaskin V(4), Greco D(5), Serra 
A(5), Kinaret PAS(5), Saarimäki LA(5), Grafström R(6)(7), Kohonen P(6)(7), 
Nymark P(6)(7), Willighagen E(8), Puzyn T(9)(10), Rybinska-Fryca A(9), 
Lyubartsev A(11), Alstrup Jensen K(12), Brandenburg JG(13)(14), Lofts S(15), 
Svendsen C(16), Harrison S(15), Maier D(17), Tamm K(18), Jänes J(18), Sikk 
L(18), Dusinska M(19), Longhin E(19), Rundén-Pran E(19), Mariussen E(19), El 
Yamani N(19), Unger W(20), Radnik J(20), Tropsha A(21), Cohen Y(22), Leszczynski 
J(23), Ogilvie Hendren C(24), Wiesner M(24), Winkler D(25)(26)(27)(28), Suzuki 
N(29), Yoon TH(30)(31), Choi JS(31), Sanabria N(32), Gulumian M(32)(33), Lynch 
I(2).

Author information:
(1)Nanoinformatics Department, NovaMechanics Ltd, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(2)School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, B15 2TT Birmingham, UK.
(3)School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 157 
80 Athens, Greece.
(4)School of Physics, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, University of Tampere, FI-33014, 
Finland.
(6)Misvik Biology OY, Itäinen Pitkäkatu 4, 20520 Turku, Finland.
(7)Karolinska Institute, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nobels väg 13, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Bioinformatics - BiGCaT, School of Nutrition and Translational 
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(9)QSAR Lab Ltd., Aleja Grunwaldzka 190/102, 80-266 Gdansk, Poland.
(10)University of Gdansk, Faculty of Chemistry, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308 Gdansk, 
Poland.
(11)Institutionen för material- och miljökemi, Stockholms Universitet, 106 91 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)The National Research Center for the Work Environment, Lersø Parkallé 105, 
2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, 
Germany.
(14)Chief Digital Organization, Merck KGaA, Frankfurter Str. 250, 64293 
Darmstadt, Germany.
(15)UK Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Library Ave, Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 
4AP, UK.
(16)UK Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, MacLean Bldg, Benson Ln, Crowmarsh 
Gifford, Wallingford OX10 8BB, UK.
(17)Biomax Informatics AG, Robert-Koch-Str. 2, 82152 Planegg, Germany.
(18)Department of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ülikooli 18, 50090 Tartu, 
Estonia.
(19)NILU-Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Instituttveien 18, 2002 Kjeller, 
Norway.
(20)Federal Institute for Material Testing and Research (BAM), Unter den Eichen 
44-46, 12203 Berlin, Germany.
(21)Eschelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
100K Beard Hall, CB# 7568, Chapel Hill, NC 27955-7568, USA.
(22)Samueli School Of Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, 5531 
Boelter Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(23)Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center, Jackson State University, 1400 J. R. 
Lynch Street, Jackson, MS 39217, USA.
(24)Center for Environmental Implications of Nanotechnologies, Duke University, 
121 Hudson Hall, Durham, NC 27708-0287, USA.
(25)La Trobe Institute of Molecular Sciences, La Trobe University, Plenty Rd & 
Kingsbury Dr, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia.
(26)Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville 
3052, Australia.
(27)CSIRO Data61, Clayton 3168, Australia.
(28)School of Pharmacy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(29)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-0053, Japan.
(30)Department of Chemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, 
Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea.
(31)Institute of Next Generation Material Design, Hanyang University, Seoul 
04763, Republic of Korea.
(32)National Health Laboratory Services, 1 Modderfontein Rd, Sandringham, 
Johannesburg 2192, South Africa.
(33)Haematology and Molecular Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.

Nanotechnology has enabled the discovery of a multitude of novel materials 
exhibiting unique physicochemical (PChem) properties compared to their bulk 
analogues. These properties have led to a rapidly increasing range of commercial 
applications; this, however, may come at a cost, if an association to long-term 
health and environmental risks is discovered or even just perceived. Many 
nanomaterials (NMs) have not yet had their potential adverse biological effects 
fully assessed, due to costs and time constraints associated with the 
experimental assessment, frequently involving animals. Here, the available NM 
libraries are analyzed for their suitability for integration with novel 
nanoinformatics approaches and for the development of NM specific Integrated 
Approaches to Testing and Assessment (IATA) for human and environmental risk 
assessment, all within the NanoSolveIT cloud-platform. These established and 
well-characterized NM libraries (e.g. NanoMILE, NanoSolutions, NANoREG, 
NanoFASE, caLIBRAte, NanoTEST and the Nanomaterial Registry (>2000 NMs)) contain 
physicochemical characterization data as well as data for several relevant 
biological endpoints, assessed in part using harmonized Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) methods and test guidelines. 
Integration of such extensive NM information sources with the latest 
nanoinformatics methods will allow NanoSolveIT to model the relationships 
between NM structure (morphology), properties and their adverse effects and to 
predict the effects of other NMs for which less data is available. The project 
specifically addresses the needs of regulatory agencies and industry to 
effectively and rapidly evaluate the exposure, NM hazard and risk from 
nanomaterials and nano-enabled products, enabling implementation of 
computational 'safe-by-design' approaches to facilitate NM commercialization.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2020.02.023
PMCID: PMC7090366
PMID: 32226594


67. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev. 2018;36(4):169-191. doi: 
10.1080/10590501.2018.1537118. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

A review on machine learning methods for in silico toxicity prediction.

Idakwo G(1), Luttrell J(1), Chen M(2), Hong H(2), Zhou Z(1), Gong P(3), Zhang 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)a School of Computing Sciences and Computer Engineering , University of 
Southern Mississippi , Hattiesburg , Mississippi , USA.
(2)b Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, National Center for 
Toxicological Science , US Food and Drug Administration , Jefferson , Arkansas , 
USA.
(3)c Environmental Laboratory , US Army Engineer Research and Development Center 
, Vicksburg , Mississippi , USA.

In silico toxicity prediction plays an important role in the regulatory decision 
making and selection of leads in drug design as in vitro/vivo methods are often 
limited by ethics, time, budget, and other resources. Many computational methods 
have been employed in predicting the toxicity profile of chemicals. This review 
provides a detailed end-to-end overview of the application of machine learning 
algorithms to Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR)-based predictive toxicology. 
From raw data to model validation, the importance of data quality is stressed as 
it greatly affects the predictive power of derived models. Commonly overlooked 
challenges such as data imbalance, activity cliff, model evaluation, and 
definition of applicability domain are highlighted, and plausible solutions for 
alleviating these challenges are discussed.

DOI: 10.1080/10590501.2018.1537118
PMID: 30628866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 4;10(1):3986. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60747-3.

High-Throughput Screening to Predict Chemical-Assay Interference.

Borrel A(1), Huang R(2), Sakamuru S(2), Xia M(2), Simeonov A(2), Mansouri K(3), 
Houck KA(4), Judson RS(4), Kleinstreuer NC(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)NIH/NIEHS/DIR/BCBB, RTP, NC, United States.
(2)NIH/NCATS, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Integrated Laboratory Systems, RTP, NC, United States.
(4)EPA/ORD/CCTE, RTP, NC, United States.
(5)NIH/NIEHS/DIR/BCBB, RTP, NC, United States. nicole.kleinstreuer@nih.gov.
(6)NIH/NIEHS/DNTP/NICEATM, RTP, NC, United States. nicole.kleinstreuer@nih.gov.

The U.S. federal consortium on toxicology in the 21st century (Tox21) produces 
quantitative, high-throughput screening (HTS) data on thousands of chemicals 
across a wide range of assays covering critical biological targets and cellular 
pathways. Many of these assays, and those used in other in vitro screening 
programs, rely on luciferase and fluorescence-based readouts that can be 
susceptible to signal interference by certain chemical structures resulting in 
false positive outcomes. Included in the Tox21 portfolio are assays specifically 
designed to measure interference in the form of luciferase inhibition and 
autofluorescence via multiple wavelengths (red, blue, and green) and under 
various conditions (cell-free and cell-based, two cell types). Out of 8,305 
chemicals tested in the Tox21 interference assays, percent actives ranged from 
0.5% (red autofluorescence) to 9.9% (luciferase inhibition). Self-organizing 
maps and hierarchical clustering were used to relate chemical structural 
clusters to interference activity profiles. Multiple machine learning algorithms 
were applied to predict assay interference based on molecular descriptors and 
chemical properties. The best performing predictive models (accuracies of ~80%) 
have been included in a web-based tool called InterPred that will allow users to 
predict the likelihood of assay interference for any new chemical structure and 
thus increase confidence in HTS data by decreasing false positive testing 
results.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60747-3
PMCID: PMC7055224
PMID: 32132587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


69. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2009 May;12(4):440-50. doi: 
10.2174/138620709788167908.

Review on lazy learning regressors and their applications in QSAR.

Kulkarni AJ(1), Jayaraman VK, Kulkarni BD.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Engineering and Process Development Division, National Chemical 
Laboratory, Pune, India.

Building accurate quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) is 
important in drug design, environmental modeling, toxicology, and chemical 
property prediction. QSAR methods can be utilized to solve mainly two types of 
problems viz., pattern recognition, (or classification) where output is discrete 
(i.e. class information), e.g., active or non-active molecule, binding or 
non-binding molecule etc., and function approximation, (i.e. regression) where 
the output is continuous (e.g., actual activity prediction). The present review 
deals with the second type of problem (regression) with specific attention to 
one of the most effective machine learning procedures, viz. lazy learning. The 
methodologies of the algorithm along with the relevant technical information are 
discussed in detail. We also present three real-life case studies to briefly 
outline the typical characteristics of the modeling formalism.

DOI: 10.2174/138620709788167908
PMID: 19442070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Stat Methods Med Res. 2000 Aug;9(4):329-58. doi: 10.1177/096228020000900403.

Knowledge discovery and data mining in toxicology.

Helma C(1), Gottmann E, Kramer S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Germany. 
helma@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Knowledge discovery and data mining tools are gaining increasing importance for 
the analysis of toxicological databases. This paper gives a survey of 
algorithms, capable to derive interpretable models from toxicological data, and 
presents the most important application areas. The majority of techniques in 
this area were derived from symbolic machine learning, one commercial product 
was developed especially for toxicological applications. The main application 
area is presently the detection of structure-activity relationships, very few 
authors have used these techniques to solve problems in epidemiological and 
clinical toxicology. Although the discussed algorithms are very flexible and 
powerful, further research is required to adopt the algorithms to the specific 
learning problems in this area, to develop improved representations of chemical 
and biological data and to enhance the interpretability of the derived models 
for toxicological experts.

DOI: 10.1177/096228020000900403
PMID: 11084712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Comput Toxicol. 2020 May;14:100122. doi: 10.1016/j.comtox.2020.100122.

Computational modelling for the sustainable management of chemicals.

Worth AP(1).

Author information:
(1)European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy.

This commentary explores the contribution of computational toxicology to 
chemical safety assessment in the context of the broad policy challenges faced 
by the European Union. The state of the European Environment is considered from 
the perspective of chemical contributions to the burden of disease and ecosystem 
damage. This sets the scene for highlighting research and innovation 
opportunities to further develop computational approaches for assessing the 
human health and environmental effects of chemicals. Emphasis is placed on focus 
topics that are particularly relevant to the political priorities of the new 
European Commission. In particular, two of the six priorities are discussed - 
"The European Green Deal" and "A Europe fit for a Digital Age". The former 
includes the zero pollution ambition for a toxic-free environment, including the 
need to develop safe and sustainable chemicals, while the latter includes the 
challenges and opportunities posed by Artificial Intelligence. This commentary 
is based on a presentation given at the 19th meeting of The Italian Society of 
Toxicology (SITOX), held in Bologna, Italy, in February 2020.

© 2020 The Author.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comtox.2020.100122
PMCID: PMC7219285
PMID: 32421066

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


72. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2012 Apr;7(4):341-52. doi: 
10.1517/17460441.2012.668182. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Decision tree models for data mining in hit discovery.

Hammann F(1), Drewe J.

Author information:
(1)University of Basel, Psychiatric University Clinic, Basel, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Decision tree induction (DTI) is a powerful means of modeling data 
without much prior preparation. Models are readable by humans, robust and easily 
applied in real-world applications, features that are mutually exclusive in 
other commonly used machine learning paradigms. While DTI is widely used in 
disciplines ranging from economics to medicine, they are an intriguing option in 
pharmaceutical research, especially when dealing with large data stores.
AREAS COVERED: This review covers the automated technologies available for 
creating decision trees and other rules efficiently, even from large datasets 
such as chemical libraries. The authors discuss the need for properly documented 
and validated models. Lastly, the authors cover several case studies in hit 
discovery, drug metabolism and toxicology, and drug surveillance, and compare 
them with other established techniques.
EXPERT OPINION: DTI is a competitive and easy-to-use tool in basic research as 
well as in hit and drug discovery. Its strengths lie in its ability to handle 
all sorts of different data formats, the visual nature of the models, and the 
small computational effort needed for implementation in real-world systems. 
Limitations include lack of robustness and over-fitted models for certain types 
of data. As with any modeling technique, proper validation and quality measures 
are of utmost importance.

© 2012 Informa UK, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1517/17460441.2012.668182
PMID: 22458505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Crit Rev Anal Chem. 2022 Apr 28:1-13. doi: 10.1080/10408347.2022.2066461. Online 
ahead of print.

Advances in Activity/Property Prediction from Chemical Structures.

Saunders A(1), Harrington PB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio, USA.

Recent technological advancement in AI modeling of molecular property databases 
has significantly expanded the opportunities for drug design and development. 
Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs) are shown to provide more 
accurate predictions with regards to biological activity as well as 
toxicological assessment. By using a combination of in-silico models or by 
combining disparate structure-activity databases, researchers have been able to 
improve accuracy for a variety of drug discovery and analysis methods, 
generating viable compounds, which in certain cases, can be synthesized and 
further studied in vitro to find candidates for potential development. 
Additionally, the development of compounds of determined toxicology can be 
discontinued earlier, allowing alternative routes to be evaluated, preventing 
wasted time and resources. Although the progress that has been made is 
tremendous, expert review is still necessary for most in-silico generated 
predictions. Regardless, the scientific community continues to move ever closer 
to completely automated drug discovery and evaluation.

DOI: 10.1080/10408347.2022.2066461
PMID: 35482792


74. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Sep 23. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-051421-105617. Online ahead of print.

Zebrafish as a Mainstream Model for In Vivo Systems Pharmacology and Toxicology.

MacRae CA(1), Peterson RT(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; email: cmacrae@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)College of Pharmacy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; email: 
randall.peterson@pharm.utah.edu.

Pharmacology and toxicology are part of a much broader effort to understand the 
relationship between chemistry and biology. While biomedicine has necessarily 
focused on specific cases, typically of direct human relevance, there are real 
advantages in pursuing more systematic approaches to characterizing how health 
and disease are influenced by small molecules and other interventions. In this 
context, the zebrafish is now established as the representative screenable 
vertebrate and, through ongoing advances in the available scale of genome 
editing and automated phenotyping, is beginning to address systems-level 
solutions to some biomedical problems. The addition of broader efforts to 
integrate information content across preclinical model organisms and the 
incorporation of rigorous analytics, including closed-loop deep learning, will 
facilitate efforts to create systems pharmacology and toxicology with the 
ability to continuously optimize chemical biological interactions around 
societal needs. In this review, we outline progress toward this goal. Expected 
final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Volume 63 is January 2023. Please see 
http://www.annualreviews.org/page/journal/pubdates for revised estimates.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-051421-105617
PMID: 36151053


75. J Toxicol Sci. 2019;44(11):721-735. doi: 10.2131/jts.44.721.

Current status and future perspective of computational toxicology in drug safety 
assessment under ontological intellection.

Yamagata Y(1), Yamada H(1), Horii I(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Toxicogenomics Informatics Project, National Institute of Biomedical 
Innovation, Health and Nutrition.
(2)Global Drug Safety Research & Development, Pfizer.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, Tokyo University of Science.

For the safety assessment of pharmaceuticals, initial data management requires 
accurate toxicological data acquisition, which is based on regulatory safety 
studies according to guidelines, and computational systems have been developed 
under the application of Good Laboratory Practice (GLP). In addition to these 
regulatory toxicology studies, investigative toxicological study data for the 
selection of lead compound and candidate compound for clinical trials are 
directed to estimation by computational systems such as Quantitative 
Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) and related expert systems. Furthermore, 
in the "Go" or "No-Go" decision of drug development, supportive utilization of a 
scientifically interpretable computational toxicology system is required for 
human safety evaluation. A pharmaceutical safety evaluator as a related 
toxicologist who is facing practical decision needs not only a data-driven 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) system that calls for the final consequence but 
also an explainable AI that can provide comprehensive information necessary for 
evaluation and can help with decision making. Through the explication and 
suggestion of information on the mechanism of toxic effects to safety assessment 
scientists, a subsidiary partnership system for risk assessment is ultimately to 
be a powerful tool that can indicate project-vector with data weight for the 
corresponding counterparts. To bridge the gaps between big data and knowledge, 
multi-dimensional thinking based on philosophical ontology theory is necessary 
for handling heterogeneous data for integration. In this review, we will explain 
the current state and future perspective of computational toxicology related to 
drug safety assessment from the viewpoint of ontology thinking.

DOI: 10.2131/jts.44.721
PMID: 31708530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Neurosci Methods. 2021 Apr 15;354:109102. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2021.109102. 
Epub 2021 Feb 17.

An adaptive digital stain separation method for deep learning-based automatic 
cell profile counts.

Dave P(1), Alahmari S(2), Goldgof D(2), Hall LO(2), Morera H(2), Mouton PR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, FL 33620, USA. Electronic address: palakdave@usf.edu.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, FL 33620, USA; SRC Biosciences, Tampa, FL 33606, USA.

BACKGROUND: Quantifying cells in a defined region of biological tissue is 
critical for many clinical and preclinical studies, especially in the fields of 
pathology, toxicology, cancer and behavior. As part of a program to develop 
accurate, precise and more efficient automatic approaches for quantifying 
morphometric changes in biological tissue, we have shown that both deep 
learning-based and hand-crafted algorithms can estimate the total number of 
histologically stained cells at their maximal profile of focus in Extended Depth 
of Field (EDF) images. Deep learning-based approaches show accuracy comparable 
to manual counts on EDF images but significant enhancement in reproducibility, 
throughput efficiency and reduced error from human factors. However, a majority 
of the automated counts are designed for single-immunostained tissue sections.
NEW METHOD: To expand the automatic counting methods to more complex 
dual-staining protocols, we developed an adaptive method to separate stain color 
channels on images from tissue sections stained by a primary immunostain with 
secondary counterstain.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS: The proposed method overcomes the limitations 
of the state-of-the-art stain-separation methods, like the requirement of pure 
stain color basis as a prerequisite or stain color basis learning on each image.
RESULTS: Experimental results are presented for automatic counts using deep 
learning-based and hand-crafted algorithms for sections immunostained for 
neurons (Neu-N) or microglial cells (Iba-1) with cresyl violet counterstain.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show more accurate counts by deep learning methods 
compared to the handcrafted method. Thus, stain-separated images can function as 
input for automatic deep learning-based quantification methods designed for 
single-stained tissue sections.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2021.109102
PMID: 33607171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Curr Opin Toxicol. 2019 Aug;16:49-57. doi: 10.1016/j.cotox.2019.04.003. Epub 
2019 Apr 19.

Embracing Systems Toxicology at Single-Cell Resolution.

Zhang Q(1), Caudle WM(1), Pi J(2), Bhattacharya S(3), Andersen ME(4), Kaminski 
NE(5), Conolly RB(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Program of Environmental Toxicology, School of Public Health, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Center for Research on Ingredient Safety, Institute for Quantitative 
Health Science and Engineering, and Institute for Integrative Toxicology, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(4)ScitoVation LLC, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Institute for Integrative 
Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(6)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental 
Effects Research Laboratory, United States Environmental Protection Agency, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA.

As systems biology expands its multi-omic spectrum to increasing resolutions, 
distinguishing cells based on single-cell profiles becomes feasible. Unlike 
traditional bulk assays that average cellular responses and blur the distinct 
identities of responsive cells, single-cell technologies enable sensitive 
detection of small cellular changes and precise identification of those cells 
perturbed by toxicants. Among the suite of omic technologies that continue to 
expand and become affordable, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is at the 
cutting edge and leading the way to transform systems toxicology. Single-cell 
systems toxicology can provide a wealth of information to elucidate 
cell-specific alterations and response trajectories, detect points-of-departure, 
map and develop dynamical models of toxicity pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cotox.2019.04.003
PMCID: PMC6876623
PMID: 31768481

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Interest None. Mention of 
products and trade names does not indicate endorsement by the federal 
government. Conclusions drawn in this study neither constitute nor necessarily 
reflect U.S. EPA policy.


78. J Chem Inf Model. 2019 Feb 25;59(2):914-923. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00803. Epub 
2019 Feb 6.

Identifying Structure-Property Relationships through SMILES Syntax Analysis with 
Self-Attention Mechanism.

Zheng S(1), Yan X(1), Yang Y(2)(3), Xu J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Drug Discovery, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Sun 
Yat-sen University , 132 East Circle at University City , Guangzhou 510006 , 
China.
(2)National Supercomputer Center in Guangzhou , Sun Yat-sen University , 
Guangzhou 510006 , China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of 
Education , Sun Yat-sen University , Guangzhou 510000 , China.
(4)School of Computer Science & Technology , Wuyi University , 99 Yingbin Road , 
Jiangmen 529020 , China.

Recognizing substructures and their relations embedded in a molecular structure 
representation is a key process for structure-activity or structure-property 
relationship (SAR/SPR) studies. A molecular structure can be explicitly 
represented as either a connection table (CT) or linear notation, such as 
SMILES, which is a language describing the connectivity of atoms in the 
molecular structure. Conventional SAR/SPR approaches rely on partitioning the CT 
into a set of predefined substructures as structural descriptors. In this work, 
we propose a new method to identifying SAR/SPR through linear notation (for 
example, SMILES) syntax analysis with self-attention mechanism, an interpretable 
deep learning architecture. The method has been evaluated by predicting chemical 
properties, toxicology, and bioactivity from experimental data sets. Our results 
demonstrate that the method yields superior performance compared with 
state-of-the-art models. Moreover, the method can produce chemically 
interpretable results, which can be used for a chemist to design and synthesize 
the activity- or property-improved compounds.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00803
PMID: 30669836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Oct 21. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-091222-022612. Online ahead of print.

Introduction to the Theme "Development of New Drugs: Moving from the Bench to 
Bedside and Improved Patient Care".

Blaschke TF(1), Insel PA(2), Amara SG(3), Meyer UA(4).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA; email: 
blaschke@stanford.edu.
(2)Departments of Pharmacology and Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(4)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Investigations in pharmacology and toxicology range from molecular studies to 
clinical care. Studies in basic and clinical pharmacology and in preclinical and 
clinical toxicology are all essential in bringing new knowledge and new drugs 
into clinical use. The 30 reviews in Volume 63 of the Annual Review of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology explore topics across this spectrum. Examples 
include "Zebrafish as a Mainstream Model for In Vivo Systems Pharmacology and 
Toxicology" and "Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for 
Lead-to-Candidate Decision-Making and Beyond." Other reviews discuss components 
important for drug discovery and development and the use of pharmaceuticals in a 
variety of diseases. Air pollution continues to increase globally; accordingly, 
"Air Pollution-Related Neurotoxicity Across the Life Span" is a timely and 
forward-thinking review. Volume 63 also explores the use of contemporary 
technologies such as electronic health records, pharmacogenetics, and new drug 
delivery systems that help enhance and improve the utility of new therapies. 
Expected final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Volume 63 is January 2023. Please see 
http://www.annualreviews.org/page/journal/pubdates for revised estimates.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-091222-022612
PMID: 36270297


80. Toxicol Res (Camb). 2020 Apr 29;9(3):164-172. doi: 10.1093/toxres/tfaa016. 
eCollection 2020 Jun.

In silico prediction of chemical neurotoxicity using machine learning.

Jiang C(1), Zhao P(1), Li W(1), Tang Y(1), Liu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Rd, Xuhui District, Shanghai 
200237, China.

Neurotoxicity is one of the main causes of drug withdrawal, and the biological 
experimental methods of detecting neurotoxic toxicity are time-consuming and 
laborious. In addition, the existing computational prediction models of 
neurotoxicity still have some shortcomings. In response to these shortcomings, 
we collected a large number of data set of neurotoxicity and used PyBioMed 
molecular descriptors and eight machine learning algorithms to construct 
regression prediction models of chemical neurotoxicity. Through the 
cross-validation and test set validation of the models, it was found that the 
extra-trees regressor model had the best predictive effect on neurotoxicity 
([Formula: see text] = 0.784). In addition, we get the applicability domain of 
the models by calculating the standard deviation distance and the lever distance 
of the training set. We also found that some molecular descriptors are closely 
related to neurotoxicity by calculating the contribution of the molecular 
descriptors to the models. Considering the accuracy of the regression models, we 
recommend using the extra-trees regressor model to predict the chemical 
autonomic neurotoxicity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxres/tfaa016
PMCID: PMC7329181
PMID: 32670548


81. J Cheminform. 2020 Mar 18;12(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s13321-020-00420-z.

COVER: conformational oversampling as data augmentation for molecules.

Hemmerich J(1), Asilar E(1), Ecker GF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstr 14, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstr 14, 
Vienna, Austria. gerhard.f.ecker@univie.ac.at.

Training neural networks with small and imbalanced datasets often leads to 
overfitting and disregard of the minority class. For predictive toxicology, 
however, models with a good balance between sensitivity and specificity are 
needed. In this paper we introduce conformational oversampling as a means to 
balance and oversample datasets for prediction of toxicity. Conformational 
oversampling enhances a dataset by generation of multiple conformations of a 
molecule. These conformations can be used to balance, as well as oversample a 
dataset, thereby increasing the dataset size without the need of artificial 
samples. We show that conformational oversampling facilitates training of neural 
networks and provides state-of-the-art results on the Tox21 dataset.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-020-00420-z
PMCID: PMC7080709
PMID: 33430975

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


82. Environ Pollut. 2019 Oct;253:29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.06.081. Epub 2019 
Jul 6.

Deep learning driven QSAR model for environmental toxicology: Effects of 
endocrine disrupting chemicals on human health.

Heo S(1), Safder U(1), Yoo C(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Environmental Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, 
Center for Environmental Studies, Kyung Hee University, Seocheon-dong 1, 
Gicheung-gu, Yongin-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, 446-701, Republic of Korea.
(2)Dept. of Environmental Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, 
Center for Environmental Studies, Kyung Hee University, Seocheon-dong 1, 
Gicheung-gu, Yongin-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, 446-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic 
address: ckyoo@khu.ac.kr.

Over 80,000 endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) are considered emerging 
contaminants (ECs), which are of great concern due to their effects on human 
health. Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models are a 
promising alternative to in vitro methods to predict the toxicological effects 
of chemicals on human health. In this study, we assessed a deep-learning based 
QSAR (DL-QSAR) model to predict the qualitative and the quantitative effects of 
EDCs on the human endocrine system, and especially sex-hormone binding globulin 
(SHBG) and estrogen receptor (ER). Statistical analyses of the qualitative 
responses indicated that the accuracies of all three DL-QSAR methods were above 
90%, and greater than the other statistical and machine learning models, 
indicating excellent classification performance. The quantitative analyses, as 
assessed using deep-neural-network-based QSAR (DNN-QSAR), resulted in a 
coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.80 and predictive square correlation 
coefficient (Q2) of 0.86, which implied satisfactory goodness of fit and 
predictive ability. Thus, DNN was able to transform sparse molecular descriptors 
into higher dimensional spaces, and was superior for assessment qualitative 
responses. Moreover, DNN-QSAR demonstrated excellent performance in the 
discipline of computational chemistry by handling multicollinearity and 
overfitting problems.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.06.081
PMID: 31302400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Environ Sci Technol. 2022 Feb 15;56(4):2115-2123. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c05970. 
Epub 2022 Jan 27.

Potential Application of Machine-Learning-Based Quantum Chemical Methods in 
Environmental Chemistry.

Xia D(1), Chen J(1), Fu Z(1), Xu T(1), Wang Z(1), Liu W(1), Xie HB(1), 
Peijnenburg WJGM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (Ministry 
of Education), Dalian Key Laboratory on Chemicals Risk Control and Pollution 
Prevention Technology, School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian 
University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China.
(2)Institute of Environmental Sciences (CML), Leiden University, Leiden 2300 RA, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Safety of Substances and Products, National Institute of Public 
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven 3720 BA, The Netherlands.

It is an important topic in environmental sciences to understand the behavior 
and toxicology of chemical pollutants. Quantum chemical methodologies have 
served as useful tools for probing behavior and toxicology of chemical 
pollutants in recent decades. In recent years, machine learning (ML) techniques 
have brought revolutionary developments to the field of quantum chemistry, which 
may be beneficial for investigating environmental behavior and toxicology of 
chemical pollutants. However, the ML-based quantum chemical methods (ML-QCMs) 
have only scarcely been used in environmental chemical studies so far. To 
promote applications of the promising methods, this Perspective summarizes 
recent progress in the ML-QCMs and focuses on their potential applications in 
environmental chemical studies that could hardly be achieved by the conventional 
quantum chemical methods. Potential applications and challenges of the ML-QCMs 
in predicting degradation networks of chemical pollutants, searching global 
minima for atmospheric nanoclusters, discovering heterogeneous or photochemical 
transformation pathways of pollutants, as well as predicting environmentally 
relevant end points with wave functions as descriptors are introduced and 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c05970
PMID: 35084191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Arch Toxicol. 2022 Jul;96(7):1935-1950. doi: 10.1007/s00204-022-03299-x. Epub 
2022 May 3.

Replacement of animal testing by integrated approaches to testing and assessment 
(IATA): a call for in vivitrosi.

Caloni F(1), De Angelis I(2), Hartung T(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science and Policy (ESP), Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Via Celoria 10, 20133, Milan, Italy. francesca.caloni@unimi.it.
(2)Environment and Health Department, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina 
Elena, 299, 00161, Rome, Italy.
(3)Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing (CAAT), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA.
(4)CAAT Europe, University of Konstanz, 78464, Konstanz, Germany.

Alternative methods to animal use in toxicology are evolving with new advanced 
tools and multilevel approaches, to answer from one side to 3Rs requirements, 
and on the other side offering relevant and valid tests for drugs and chemicals, 
considering also their combination in test strategies, for a proper risk 
assessment.While stand-alone methods, have demonstrated to be applicable for 
some specific toxicological predictions with some limitations, the new strategy 
for the application of New Approach Methods (NAM), to solve complex 
toxicological endpoints is addressed by Integrated Approaches for Testing and 
Assessment (IATA), aka Integrated Testing Strategies (ITS) or Defined Approaches 
for Testing and Assessment (DA). The central challenge of evidence integration 
is shared with the needs of risk assessment and systematic reviews of an 
evidence-based Toxicology. Increasingly, machine learning (aka Artificial 
Intelligence, AI) lends itself to integrate diverse evidence streams.In this 
article, we give an overview of the state of the art of alternative methods and 
IATA in toxicology for regulatory use for various hazards, outlining future 
orientation and perspectives. We call on leveraging the synergies of integrated 
approaches and evidence integration from in vivo, in vitro and in silico as true 
in vivitrosi.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-022-03299-x
PMCID: PMC9151502
PMID: 35503372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


85. Environ Int. 2021 Jan;146:106308. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106308. Epub 2020 
Dec 11.

Human exposure pathways to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from 
indoor media: A systematic review protocol.

DeLuca NM(1), Angrish M(2), Wilkins A(2), Thayer K(2), Cohen Hubal EA(2).

Author information:
(1)US EPA, Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Research 
Triangle Park, NC, United States. Electronic address: deluca.nicole@epa.gov.
(2)US EPA, Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Research 
Triangle Park, NC, United States.

BACKGROUND: Human exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) has 
been primarily attributed to contaminated food and drinking water. However, 
additional PFAS exposure pathways have been raised by a limited number of 
studies reporting correlations between commercial and industrial products and 
PFAS levels in human media and biomonitoring. Systematic review (SR) 
methodologies have been widely used to evaluate similar questions using an 
unbiased approach in the fields of clinical medicine, epidemiology, and 
toxicology, but the deployment in exposure science is ongoing. Here we present a 
systematic review protocol that adapts existing systematic review methodologies 
and study evaluation tools to exposure science studies in order to investigate 
evidence for important PFAS exposure pathways from indoor media including 
consumer products, household articles, cleaning products, personal care 
products, plus indoor air and dust.
OBJECTIVES: We will systematically review exposure science studies that present 
both PFAS concentrations from indoor exposure media and PFAS concentrations in 
blood serum or plasma. Exposure estimates will be synthesized from the evidence 
to answer the question, "For the general population, what effect does exposure 
from PFAS chemicals via indoor media have on blood, serum or plasma 
concentrations of PFAS?" We adapt existing systematic review methodologies and 
study evaluation tools from the U.S. EPA's Systematic Review Protocol for the 
PFBA, PFHxA, PFHxS, PFNA, and PFDA IRIS Assessments and the Navigation Guide for 
exposure science studies, as well as present innovative developments of exposure 
pathway-specific search strings for use in artificial intelligence screening 
software.
DATA SOURCES: We will search electronic databases for potentially relevant 
literature, including Web of Science, PubMed, and ProQuest. Literature search 
results will be stored in EPA's Health and Environmental Research Online (HERO) 
database.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY AND CRITERIA: Included studies will present exposure measures 
from indoor media including consumer products, household articles, cleaning 
products, personal care products, plus indoor air and dust, paired with PFAS 
concentrations in blood, serum or plasma from adults and/or children in the 
general population. We focus on a subset of PFAS chemicals including 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS), 
perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA), perfluorobutane sulfonate (PFBS), 
perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), 
perfluorohexanesulfonate (PFHxS), and perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA).
STUDY APPRAISAL AND SYNTHESIS METHODS: Studies will be prefiltered at the title 
and abstract level using computationally intelligent search strings to expedite 
the screening process for reviewers. Two independent reviewers will screen the 
prefiltered studies against inclusion criteria at the title/abstract level and 
then full-text level, after which the reviewers will assess the studies' risk of 
bias using an approach modified from established systematic review tools for 
exposure studies. Exposure estimates will be calculated to investigate the 
proportion of blood, serum or plasma) PFAS concentrations that can be explained 
by exposure to PFAS in indoor media.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106308
PMCID: PMC8118191
PMID: 33395950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Toxicol Pathol. 2021 Jun;49(4):872-887. doi: 10.1177/0192623320969678. Epub 2020 
Nov 28.

Deep Learning-Based Spermatogenic Staging Assessment for Hematoxylin and 
Eosin-Stained Sections of Rat Testes.

Creasy DM(1), Panchal ST(2), Garg R(3), Samanta P(3).

Author information:
(1)Dianne Creasy Consulting, Norfolk, United Kingdom.
(2)211325Sun Pharma Advanced Research Co Ltd, Vadodara, Gujarat, India.
(3)AIRA MATRIX, Thane, Maharashtra, India.

In preclinical toxicology studies, a "stage-aware" histopathological evaluation 
of testes is recognized as the most sensitive method to detect effects on 
spermatogenesis. A stage-aware evaluation requires the pathologist to be able to 
identify the different stages of the spermatogenic cycle. Classically, this 
evaluation has been performed using periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-stained sections 
to visualize the morphology of the developing spermatid acrosome, but due to the 
complexity of the rat spermatogenic cycle and the subtlety of the criteria used 
to distinguish between the 14 stages of the cycle, staging of tubules is not 
only time consuming but also requires specialized training and practice to 
become competent. Using different criteria, based largely on the shape and 
movement of the elongating spermatids within the tubule and pooling some of the 
stages, it is possible to stage tubules using routine hematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E)-stained sections, thereby negating the need for a special PAS stain. These 
criteria have been used to develop an automated method to identify the stages of 
the rat spermatogenic cycle in digital images of H&E-stained Wistar rat testes. 
The algorithm identifies the spermatogenic stage of each tubule, thereby 
allowing the pathologist to quickly evaluate the testis in a stage-aware manner 
and rapidly calculate the stage frequencies.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623320969678
PMID: 33252007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cheminform. 2021 Nov 27;13(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00570-8.

Chemical toxicity prediction based on semi-supervised learning and graph 
convolutional neural network.

Chen J(1), Si YW(1), Un CW(1), Siu SWI(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Avenida 
da Universidade, Taipa, 999078, Macau, China.
(2)Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Avenida 
da Universidade, Taipa, 999078, Macau, China. shirleysiu@um.edu.mo.
(3)Institute of Science and Environment, University of Saint Joseph, Rua de 
Londres 106, 999078, Macau, China. shirleysiu@um.edu.mo.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, USM, 11800, 
Penang, Malaysia. shirleysiu@um.edu.mo.

As safety is one of the most important properties of drugs, chemical toxicology 
prediction has received increasing attentions in the drug discovery research. 
Traditionally, researchers rely on in vitro and in vivo experiments to test the 
toxicity of chemical compounds. However, not only are these experiments time 
consuming and costly, but experiments that involve animal testing are 
increasingly subject to ethical concerns. While traditional machine learning 
(ML) methods have been used in the field with some success, the limited 
availability of annotated toxicity data is the major hurdle for further 
improving model performance. Inspired by the success of semi-supervised learning 
(SSL) algorithms, we propose a Graph Convolution Neural Network (GCN) to predict 
chemical toxicity and trained the network by the Mean Teacher (MT) SSL 
algorithm. Using the Tox21 data, our optimal SSL-GCN models for predicting the 
twelve toxicological endpoints achieve an average ROC-AUC score of 0.757 in the 
test set, which is a 6% improvement over GCN models trained by supervised 
learning and conventional ML methods. Our SSL-GCN models also exhibit superior 
performance when compared to models constructed using the built-in DeepChem ML 
methods. This study demonstrates that SSL can increase the prediction power of 
models by learning from unannotated data. The optimal unannotated to annotated 
data ratio ranges between 1:1 and 4:1. This study demonstrates the success of 
SSL in chemical toxicity prediction; the same technique is expected to be 
beneficial to other chemical property prediction tasks by utilizing existing 
large chemical databases. Our optimal model SSL-GCN is hosted on an online 
server accessible through: https://app.cbbio.online/ssl-gcn/home .

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-021-00570-8
PMCID: PMC8627024
PMID: 34838140

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


88. Molecules. 2022 May 8;27(9):3021. doi: 10.3390/molecules27093021.

Identifying Protein Features and Pathways Responsible for Toxicity Using Machine 
Learning and Tox21: Implications for Predictive Toxicology.

Moukheiber L(1), Mangione W(2), Moukheiber M(2), Maleki S(3), Falls Z(2), Gao 
M(1), Samudrala R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY 14260, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 
14260, USA.

Humans are exposed to numerous compounds daily, some of which have adverse 
effects on health. Computational approaches for modeling toxicological data in 
conjunction with machine learning algorithms have gained popularity over the 
last few years. Machine learning approaches have been used to predict 
toxicity-related biological activities using chemical structure descriptors. 
However, toxicity-related proteomic features have not been fully investigated. 
In this study, we construct a computational pipeline using machine learning 
models for predicting the most important protein features responsible for the 
toxicity of compounds taken from the Tox21 dataset that is implemented within 
the multiscale Computational Analysis of Novel Drug Opportunities (CANDO) 
therapeutic discovery platform. Tox21 is a highly imbalanced dataset consisting 
of twelve in vitro assays, seven from the nuclear receptor (NR) signaling 
pathway and five from the stress response (SR) pathway, for more than 10,000 
compounds. For the machine learning model, we employed a random forest with the 
combination of Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) and the Edited 
Nearest Neighbor (ENN) method (SMOTE+ENN), which is a resampling method to 
balance the activity class distribution. Within the NR and SR pathways, the 
activity of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (NR-AhR) and the mitochondrial 
membrane potential (SR-MMP) were two of the top-performing twelve toxicity 
endpoints with AUCROCs of 0.90 and 0.92, respectively. The top extracted 
features for evaluating compound toxicity were analyzed for enrichment to 
highlight the implicated biological pathways and proteins. We validated our 
enrichment results for the activity of the AhR using a thorough literature 
search. Our case study showed that the selected enriched pathways and proteins 
from our computational pipeline are not only correlated with AhR toxicity but 
also form a cascading upstream/downstream arrangement. Our work elucidates 
significant relationships between protein and compound interactions computed 
using CANDO and the associated biological pathways to which the proteins belong 
for twelve toxicity endpoints. This novel study uses machine learning not only 
to predict and understand toxicity but also elucidates therapeutic mechanisms at 
a proteomic level for a variety of toxicity endpoints.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27093021
PMCID: PMC9099959
PMID: 35566372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interest exist. The funders had no role in the design of the study, in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; nor in the decision to publish the result.


89. Toxicol Pathol. 2021 Aug;49(6):1164-1173. doi: 10.1177/01926233211017031. Epub 
2021 Jun 1.

Utilizing Whole Slide Images for the Primary Evaluation and Peer Review of a 
GLP-Compliant Rodent Toxicology Study.

Jacobsen M(1), Lewis A(2), Baily J(3), Fraser A(4), Rudmann D(5), Ryan S(6).

Author information:
(1)Regulatory Safety, Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, 
BioPharmaceuticals R&D, 4625AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Imaging & Data Analytics, Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, 
BioPharmaceuticals R&D, 4625AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)57146Charles River Laboratories Preclinical Services, Elphinstone Research 
Centre Tranent, East Lothian, UK.
(4)70294Charles River Laboratories Preclinical Services, Senneville, Quebec, 
Canada.
(5)126269Charles River Laboratories Preclinical Services, Ashland, OH, USA.
(6)Deciphex, Dublin, Ireland.

The approach undertaken to deliver a Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) validation 
of whole slide images (WSIs) and the associated workflow for the digital primary 
evaluation and peer review of a GLP-compliant rodent inhalation toxicity study 
is described. The contract research organization (CRO) undertook validation of 
the slide scanner, scanner software, and associated database software. This 
provided a GLP validated environment within the database software for the 
primary histopathologic evaluation using WSI and viewed with the database 
software web viewer. The CRO also validated a cloud-based digital pathology 
platform that supported the upload and transfer of WSI and metadata to a cache 
within the sponsor's local area network. The sponsor undertook a separate GLP 
validation of the same cloud-based digital pathology platform to cover the 
download and review of the WSI. The establishment of a fit-for-purpose 
GLP-compliant workflow for WSI and successful deployment for the digital primary 
evaluation and peer review of a large GLP toxicology study enabled flexibility 
in accelerated global working and potential future reuse of digitized data for 
advanced artificial intelligence and machine learning image analysis.

DOI: 10.1177/01926233211017031
PMID: 34060353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Toxicol Sci. 2019 May 1;169(1):54-69. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz021.

A Systems Toxicology Approach for the Prediction of Kidney Toxicity and Its 
Mechanisms In Vitro.

Ramm S(1)(2), Todorov P(1)(3), Chandrasekaran V(1), Dohlman A(1), Monteiro 
MB(1), Pavkovic M(1)(2), Muhlich J(1), Shankaran H(3), Chen WW(1), Mettetal 
JT(3), Vaidya VS(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Program in Therapeutic Sciences, 
Harvard Medical SchoolBoston, MA.
(2)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA.
(3)Safety and ADME Modeling, Drug Safety, and Metabolism, IMED Biotech Unit, 
AstraZeneca, Waltham MA.
(4)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA.

The failure to predict kidney toxicity of new chemical entities early in the 
development process before they reach humans remains a critical issue. Here, we 
used primary human kidney cells and applied a systems biology approach that 
combines multidimensional datasets and machine learning to identify biomarkers 
that not only predict nephrotoxic compounds but also provide hints toward their 
mechanism of toxicity. Gene expression and high-content imaging-derived 
phenotypical data from 46 diverse kidney toxicants were analyzed using Random 
Forest machine learning. Imaging features capturing changes in cell morphology 
and nucleus texture along with mRNA levels of HMOX1 and SQSTM1 were identified 
as the most powerful predictors of toxicity. These biomarkers were validated by 
their ability to accurately predict kidney toxicity of four out of six candidate 
therapeutics that exhibited toxicity only in late stage preclinical/clinical 
studies. Network analysis of similarities in toxic phenotypes was performed 
based on live-cell high-content image analysis at seven time points. Using 
compounds with known mechanism as reference, we could infer potential mechanisms 
of toxicity of candidate therapeutics. In summary, we report an approach to 
generate a multidimensional biomarker panel for mechanistic de-risking and 
prediction of kidney toxicity in in vitro for new therapeutic candidates and 
chemical entities.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz021
PMCID: PMC6484891
PMID: 30649541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Environ Int. 2022 Aug 4;168:107438. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107438. Online 
ahead of print.

Lead exposure and antisocial behavior: A systematic review protocol.

Shaffer RM(1), Forsyth JE(2), Ferraro G(3), Till C(4), Carlson LM(1), Hester 
K(1), Haddock A(1), Strawbridge J(5), Lanfear CC(6), Hu H(7), Kirrane E(8).

Author information:
(1)US Environmental Protection Agency, Center for Public Health and 
Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC, and Research Triangle Park, NC, United 
States.
(2)Stanford University, Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford, CA, 
United States.
(3)North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(4)Faculty of Health, York University, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Oak Ridge Associated Universities, US Environmental Protection Agency, Center 
for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
United States.
(6)Nuffield College, University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(8)US Environmental Protection Agency, Center for Public Health and 
Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC, and Research Triangle Park, NC, United 
States. Electronic address: Kirrane.ellen@epa.gov.

BACKGROUND: Lead exposure remains highly prevalent worldwide despite decades of 
research highlighting its link to numerous adverse health outcomes. In addition 
to well-documented effects on cognition, there is growing evidence of an 
association with antisocial behavior, including aggression, conduct problems, 
and crime. An updated systematic review on this topic, incorporating study 
evaluation and a developmental perspective on the outcome, can advance the state 
of the science on lead and inform global policy interventions to reduce 
exposure.
OBJECTIVES: We aim to evaluate the link between lead exposure and antisocial 
behavior. This association will be investigated via a systematic review of human 
epidemiological and experimental nonhuman mammalian studies.
METHODS: The systematic review protocol presented in this publication is 
informed by recommendations for the conduct of systematic reviews in toxicology 
and environmental health research (COSTER) and follows the study evaluation 
approach put forth by the U.S. EPA Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) 
program.
DATA SOURCES: We will search the following electronic databases for relevant 
literature: PubMed, BIOSIS and Web of Science. Search results will be stored in 
EPA's Health and Environmental Research Online (HERO) database.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY AND CRITERIA: Eligible human epidemiological studies will 
include those evaluating any population exposed to lead at any lifestage via 
ingestion or inhalation exposure and considering an outcome of antisocial 
behavior based on any of the following criteria: psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., 
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), conduct disorder (CD), disruptive behavior 
disorders (DBD)); violation of social norms (e.g., delinquency, criminality); 
and aggression. Eligible experimental animal studies will include those 
evaluating nonhuman mammalian studies exposed to lead via ingestion, inhalation, 
or injection exposure during any lifestage. The following outcomes will be 
considered relevant: aggression; antisocial behavior; and altered fear, anxiety, 
and stress response.
STUDY APPRAISAL AND SYNTHESIS METHODS: Screening will be conducted with 
assistance from an artificial intelligence application. Two independent 
reviewers for each data stream (human, animal) will screen studies with highest 
predicted relevance against pre-specified inclusion criteria at the 
title/abstract and full-text level. Study evaluation will be conducted using 
methods adapted from the U.S. EPA IRIS program. After data extraction, we will 
conduct a narrative review and quantitative meta-analysis on the human 
epidemiological studies as well as a narrative review of the experimental animal 
studies. We will evaluate the strength of each evidence stream separately and 
then will develop a summary evidence integration statement based on inference 
across evidence streams.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107438
PMID: 35994796


92. Environ Int. 2022 Jul;165:107323. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107323. Epub 2022 
May 28.

Adverse outcome pathway from activation of the AhR to breast cancer-related 
death.

Benoit L(1), Jornod F(2), Zgheib E(2), Tomkiewicz C(2), Koual M(3), Coustillet 
T(2), Barouki R(3), Audouze K(2), Vinken M(4), Coumoul X(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, T3S, INSERM UMR-S 1124, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 
Paris, France; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, European Hospital 
Georges-Pompidou, Gynecologic and Breast Oncologic Surgery Department, Paris, 
France. Electronic address: louise.am.benoit@gmail.com.
(2)Université Paris Cité, T3S, INSERM UMR-S 1124, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 
Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Cité, T3S, INSERM UMR-S 1124, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 
Paris, France; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, European Hospital 
Georges-Pompidou, Gynecologic and Breast Oncologic Surgery Department, Paris, 
France.
(4)Entity of In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology, Department of 
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.

Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) are formalized and structured linear concepts 
that connect one molecular initiating event (MIE) to an adverse outcome (AO) via 
different key events (KE) through key event relationships (KER). They are mainly 
used in eco-toxicology toxicology, and regulatory health issues. AOPs must 
respond to specific guidelines from the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) to weight the evidence between each KE. Breast cancer is 
the deadliest cancer in women with a poor prognosis in case of metastatic breast 
cancer. The role of the environments in the formation of metastasis has been 
suggested. We hypothesized that activation of the AhR (MIE), a xenobiotic 
receptor, could lead to breast cancer related death (AO), through different KEs, 
constituting a new AOP. An artificial intelligence tool (AOP-helpfinder), which 
screens the available literature, was used to collect all existing scientific 
abstracts to build a novel AOP, using a list of key words. Four hundred and 
seven abstracts were found containing at least a word from our MIE list and 
either one word from our AO or KE list. A manual curation retained 113 pertinent 
articles, which were also screened using PubTator. From these analyses, an AOP 
was created linking the activation of the AhR to breast cancer related death 
through decreased apoptosis, inflammation, endothelial cell migration, 
angiogenesis, and invasion. These KEs promote an increased tumor growth, 
angiogenesis and migration which leads to breast cancer metastasis and breast 
cancer related death. The evidence of the proposed AOP was weighted using the 
tailored Bradford Hill criteria and the OECD guidelines. The confidence in our 
AOP was considered strong. An in vitro validation must be carried out, but our 
review proposes a strong relationship between AhR activation and breast 
cancer-related death with an innovative use of an artificial intelligence 
literature search.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107323
PMID: 35660951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Food Chem Toxicol. 2020 Jan;135:110921. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2019.110921. Epub 
2019 Oct 25.

CapsCarcino: A novel sparse data deep learning tool for predicting carcinogens.

Wang YW(1), Huang L(2), Jiang SW(3), Li K(4), Zou J(5), Yang SY(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China; College of Preclinical 
Medicine, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR China.
(2)School of Computer Science & Engineer, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, 611731, PR China; Basic Teaching 
Department, Sichuan College of Architectural Technology, Deyang, Sichuan, 61800, 
PR China.
(3)School of Computer Science & Engineer, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, 611731, PR China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China. Electronic address: 
zoujunwch@scu.edu.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China. Electronic address: 
yangsy@scu.edu.cn.

Determining chemical carcinogenicity in the early stages of drug discovery is 
fundamentally important to prevent the adverse effect of carcinogens on human 
health. There has been a recent surge of interest in developing computational 
approaches to predict chemical carcinogenicity. However, the predictive power of 
many existing approaches is limited, and there is plenty of room for 
improvement. Here, we develop a new deep learning architecture, termed 
CapsCarcino, to distinguish between carcinogens and noncarcinogens. CapsCarcino 
is constructed based on a dynamic routing algorithm that requires less data, 
extracts more comprehensive information, and does not require feature selection. 
We find that CapsCarcino provides a significantly improved predictive and 
generalization ability over, and outperforms five other machine learning models. 
Specifically, the best model of CapsCarcino achieves an accuracy of 85.0% on an 
external validation dataset. In addition, we discover that the enhanced 
predictive capability of CapsCarcino over that of the other methods is robust 
and can be achieved using sparse datasets. Training on merely 20% of the 
dataset, CapsCarcino performs comparably to the other methods based on the full 
training dataset. Further mechanism analysis indicates that CapsCarcino could 
efficiently learn the characteristics of carcinogens even if structural alerts 
are insufficiently represented. The results indicate that CapsCarcino should be 
helpful for carcinogen risk assessment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2019.110921
PMID: 31669597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Inform. 2020 May;39(5):e2000005. doi: 10.1002/minf.202000005. Epub 2020 Mar 
23.

Using Machine Learning Methods and Structural Alerts for Prediction of 
Mitochondrial Toxicity.

Hemmerich J(1), Troger F(1), Füzi B(1), F Ecker G(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Vienna, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Althanstr. 14, 
1090, Vienna, Austria.

Over the last few years more and more organ and idiosyncratic toxicities were 
linked to mitochondrial toxicity. Despite well-established assays, such as the 
seahorse and Glucose/Galactose assay, an in silico approach to mitochondrial 
toxicity is still feasible, particularly when it comes to the assessment of 
large compound libraries. Therefore, in silico approaches could be very 
beneficial to indicate hazards early in the drug development pipeline. By 
combining multiple endpoints, we derived the largest so far published dataset on 
mitochondrial toxicity. A thorough data analysis shows that molecules causing 
mitochondrial toxicity can be distinguished by physicochemical properties. 
Finally, the combination of machine learning and structural alerts highlights 
the suitability for in silico risk assessment of mitochondrial toxicity.

© 2020 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.202000005
PMCID: PMC7317375
PMID: 32108997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


95. Environ Sci Technol. 2022 Jun 21;56(12):7532-7543. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c07413. 
Epub 2022 Jun 6.

Artificial Intelligence-Based Toxicity Prediction of Environmental Chemicals: 
Future Directions for Chemical Management Applications.

Jeong J(1), Choi J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental Engineering, University of Seoul, 163 
Seoulsiripdae-ro, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 02504, South Korea.

Recently, research on the development of artificial intelligence (AI)-based 
computational toxicology models that predict toxicity without the use of animal 
testing has emerged because of the rapid development of computer technology. 
Various computational toxicology techniques that predict toxicity based on the 
structure of chemical substances are gaining attention, including the 
quantitative structure-activity relationship. To understand the recent 
development of these models, we analyzed the databases, molecular descriptors, 
fingerprints, and algorithms considered in recent studies. Based on a selection 
of 96 papers published since 2014, we found that AI models have been developed 
to predict approximately 30 different toxicity end points using more than 20 
toxicity databases. For model development, molecular access system and 
extended-connectivity fingerprints are the most commonly used molecular 
descriptors. The most used algorithm among the machine learning techniques is 
the random forest, while the most used algorithm among the deep learning 
techniques is a deep neural network. The use of AI technology in the development 
of toxicity prediction models is a new concept that will aid in achieving a 
scientific accord and meet regulatory applications. The comprehensive overview 
provided in this study will provide a useful guide for the further development 
and application of toxicity prediction models.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c07413
PMID: 35666838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Comput Toxicol. 2022 Feb;21:100205. doi: 10.1016/j.comtox.2021.100205.

A matter of trust: Learning lessons about causality will make qAOPs credible.

Spînu N(1), Cronin MTD(1), Madden JC(1), Worth AP(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Byrom Street, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK.
(2)European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy.

Toxicology in the 21st Century has seen a shift from chemical risk assessment 
based on traditional animal tests, identifying apical endpoints and doses that 
are "safe", to the prospect of Next Generation Risk Assessment based on 
non-animal methods. Increasingly, large and high throughput in vitro datasets 
are being generated and exploited to develop computational models. This is 
accompanied by an increased use of machine learning approaches in the model 
building process. A potential problem, however, is that such models, while 
robust and predictive, may still lack credibility from the perspective of the 
end-user. In this commentary, we argue that the science of causal inference and 
reasoning, as proposed by Judea Pearl, will facilitate the development, use and 
acceptance of quantitative AOP models. Our hope is that by importing established 
concepts of causality from outside the field of toxicology, we can be 
"constructively disruptive" to the current toxicological paradigm, using the 
"Causal Revolution" to bring about a "Toxicological Revolution" more rapidly.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.comtox.2021.100205
PMCID: PMC8855346
PMID: 35224319

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


97. Comput Biol Med. 2019 Feb;105:157-168. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.12.016. 
Epub 2019 Jan 3.

High throughput automated detection of axial malformations in Medaka embryo.

Genest D(1), Puybareau E(2), Léonard M(3), Cousty J(4), De Crozé N(3), Talbot 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE, UPEM, 2 Boulevard 
Blaise Pascal, 93162, Noisy-le Grand, France; L'OREAL Research & Innovation, 1 
avenue Eugène Schueller, 93600, Aulnay sous Bois, France. Electronic address: 
diane.genest@esiee.fr.
(2)Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE, UPEM, 2 Boulevard 
Blaise Pascal, 93162, Noisy-le Grand, France; EPITA Research and Development 
Laboratory (LRDE), 14-16 rue Voltaire, 94270, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
Electronic address: elodie.puybareau@lrde.epita.fr.
(3)L'OREAL Research & Innovation, 1 avenue Eugène Schueller, 93600, Aulnay sous 
Bois, France.
(4)Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE, UPEM, 2 Boulevard 
Blaise Pascal, 93162, Noisy-le Grand, France.

Fish embryo models are widely used as screening tools to assess the efficacy 
and/or toxicity of chemicals. This assessment involves the analysis of embryo 
morphological abnormalities. In this article, we propose a multi-scale pipeline 
to allow automated classification of fish embryos (Medaka: Oryzias latipes) 
based on the presence or absence of spine malformations. The proposed pipeline 
relies on the acquisition of fish embryo 2D images, on feature extraction based 
on mathematical morphology operators and on machine learning classification. 
After image acquisition, segmentation tools are used to detect the embryo before 
analysing several morphological features. An approach based on machine learning 
is then applied to these features to automatically classify embryos according to 
the presence of axial malformations. We built and validated our learning model 
on 1459 images with a 10-fold cross-validation by comparison with the gold 
standard of 3D observations performed under a microscope by a trained operator. 
Our pipeline results in correct classification in 85% of the cases included in 
the database. This percentage is similar to the percentage of success of a 
trained human operator working on 2D images. The key benefit of our approach is 
the low computational cost of our image analysis pipeline, which guarantees 
optimal throughput analysis.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.12.016
PMID: 30654166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Feb 22;61(2):653-663. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01164. Epub 
2021 Feb 3.

Large-Scale Modeling of Multispecies Acute Toxicity End Points Using Consensus 
of Multitask Deep Learning Methods.

Jain S(1), Siramshetty VB(1), Alves VM(2), Muratov EN(2), Kleinstreuer N(3)(4), 
Tropsha A(2), Nicklaus MC(5), Simeonov A(1), Zakharov AV(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), National 
Institutes of Health, 9800 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, Maryland 20850, 
United States.
(2)UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, United States.
(3)Division of Intramural Research, Biostatistics and Computational Biology 
Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 111 T.W. Alexander 
Drive, Durham, North Carolina 27709, United States.
(4)National Toxicology Program Interagency Center for the Evaluation of 
Alternative Toxicological Methods, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, 111 T.W. Alexander Drive, Durham, North Carolina 27709, United States.
(5)Computer-Aided Drug Design (CADD) Group, Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
DHHS, NCI-Frederick, 376 Boyles Street, Frederick, Maryland 21702, United 
States.

Computational methods to predict molecular properties regarding safety and 
toxicology represent alternative approaches to expedite drug development, screen 
environmental chemicals, and thus significantly reduce associated time and 
costs. There is a strong need and interest in the development of computational 
methods that yield reliable predictions of toxicity, and many approaches, 
including the recently introduced deep neural networks, have been leveraged 
towards this goal. Herein, we report on the collection, curation, and 
integration of data from the public data sets that were the source of the 
ChemIDplus database for systemic acute toxicity. These efforts generated the 
largest publicly available such data set comprising > 80,000 compounds measured 
against a total of 59 acute systemic toxicity end points. This data was used for 
developing multiple single- and multitask models utilizing random forest, deep 
neural networks, convolutional, and graph convolutional neural network 
approaches. For the first time, we also reported the consensus models based on 
different multitask approaches. To the best of our knowledge, prediction models 
for 36 of the 59 end points have never been published before. Furthermore, our 
results demonstrated a significantly better performance of the consensus model 
obtained from three multitask learning approaches that particularly predicted 
the 29 smaller tasks (less than 300 compounds) better than other models 
developed in the study. The curated data set and the developed models have been 
made publicly available at https://github.com/ncats/ld50-multitask, 
https://predictor.ncats.io/, and 
https://cactus.nci.nih.gov/download/acute-toxicity-db (data set only) to support 
regulatory and research applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01164
PMCID: PMC8780008
PMID: 33533614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Environ Sci Technol. 2018 Nov 20;52(22):12953-12955. doi: 
10.1021/acs.est.8b05382. Epub 2018 Oct 19.

Machine Learning for Environmental Toxicology: A Call for Integration and 
Innovation.

Miller TH(1), Gallidabino MD(2), MacRae JI(3), Hogstrand C(4), Bury NR(5), 
Barron LP(1), Snape JR(6)(7), Owen SF(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical, Environmental & Forensic Sciences, School of 
Population Health & Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine , King's College London , 150 Stamford Street , London SE1 9NH , U.K.
(2)Department of Applied Sciences , Northumbria University , Newcastle Upon Tyne 
NE1 8ST , U.K.
(3)Metabolomics Laboratory , The Francis Crick Institute , 1 Midland Road , 
London , NW1 1AT , U.K.
(4)Division of Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine , King's College London , Franklin Wilkins Building, 150 Stamford 
Street , London SE1 9NH , U.K.
(5)School of Science, Technology and Engineering and Suffolk Sustainability 
Institute , University of Suffolk , James Hehir Building, University Avenue , 
Ipswich , Suffolk IP3 0FS , U.K.
(6)AstraZeneca , Global Environment, Alderley Park , Macclesfield , Cheshire 
SK10 4TF , U.K.
(7)School of Life Science , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , U.K.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.8b05382
PMID: 30338686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Sci Rep. 2021 Jan 28;11(1):2535. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-82115-5.

Transforming early pharmaceutical assessment of genotoxicity: applying 
statistical learning to a high throughput, multi end point in vitro micronucleus 
assay.

Wilson A(1), Grabowski P(2), Elloway J(3), Ling S(2), Stott J(4), Doherty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional and Mechanistic Safety, Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, 
R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK. amy.wilson3@astrazeneca.com.
(2)Imaging and Data Analytics, Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, R&D, 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Functional and Mechanistic Safety, Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, 
R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(4)MAG-O, Manchester Airport, Manchester, UK.

To provide a comprehensive analysis of small molecule genotoxic potential we 
have developed and validated an automated, high-content, high throughput, 
image-based in vitro Micronucleus (IVM) assay. This assay simultaneously 
assesses micronuclei and multiple additional cellular markers associated with 
genotoxicity. Acoustic dosing (≤ 2 mg) of compound is followed by a 24-h 
treatment and a 24-h recovery period. Confocal images are captured [Cell Voyager 
CV7000 (Yokogawa, Japan)] and analysed using Columbus software (PerkinElmer). As 
standard the assay detects micronuclei (MN), cytotoxicity and cell-cycle 
profiles from Hoechst phenotypes. Mode of action information is primarily 
determined by kinetochore labelling in MN (aneugencity) and γH2AX foci analysis 
(a marker of DNA damage). Applying computational approaches and implementing 
machine learning models alongside Bayesian classifiers allows the identification 
of, with 95% accuracy, the aneugenic, clastogenic and negative compounds within 
the data set (Matthews correlation coefficient: 0.9), reducing analysis time by 
80% whilst concurrently minimising human bias. Combining high throughput 
screening, multiparametric image analysis and machine learning approaches has 
provided the opportunity to revolutionise early Genetic Toxicology assessment 
within AstraZeneca. By multiplexing assay endpoints and minimising data 
generation and analysis time this assay enables complex genotoxicity safety 
assessments to be made sooner aiding the development of safer drug candidates.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82115-5
PMCID: PMC7844000
PMID: 33510380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


101. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Dec 29;22(1):206. doi: 10.3390/s22010206.

Generative Adversarial Networks for Morphological-Temporal Classification of 
Stem Cell Images.

Witmer A(1)(2), Bhanu B(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Visualization and Intelligent Systems Laboratory, University of California, 
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, 
USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, 
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Frequently, neural network training involving biological images suffers from a 
lack of data, resulting in inefficient network learning. This issue stems from 
limitations in terms of time, resources, and difficulty in cellular 
experimentation and data collection. For example, when performing experimental 
analysis, it may be necessary for the researcher to use most of their data for 
testing, as opposed to model training. Therefore, the goal of this paper is to 
perform dataset augmentation using generative adversarial networks (GAN) to 
increase the classification accuracy of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) 
trained on induced pluripotent stem cell microscopy images. The main challenges 
are: 1. modeling complex data using GAN and 2. training neural networks on 
augmented datasets that contain generated data. To address these challenges, a 
temporally constrained, hierarchical classification scheme that exploits domain 
knowledge is employed for model learning. First, image patches of cell colonies 
from gray-scale microscopy images are generated using GAN, and then these images 
are added to the real dataset and used to address class imbalances at multiple 
stages of training. Overall, a 2% increase in both true positive rate and 
F1-score is observed using this method as compared to a straightforward, 
imbalanced classification network, with some greater improvements on a classwise 
basis. This work demonstrates that synergistic model design involving domain 
knowledge is key for biological image analysis and improves model learning in 
high-throughput scenarios.

DOI: 10.3390/s22010206
PMCID: PMC8749838
PMID: 35009749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


102. EFSA J. 2019 Jul 8;17(Suppl 1):e170710. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2019.e170710. 
eCollection 2019 Jul.

Predicting toxicity of chemicals: software beats animal testing.

Hartung T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing (CAAT) 
Baltimore MD USA.
(2)University of Konstanz CAAT-Europe Konstanz Germany.

We created earlier a large machine-readable database of 10,000 chemicals and 
800,000 associated studies by natural language processing of the public parts of 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) 
registrations until December 2014. This database was used to assess the 
reproducibility of the six most frequently used Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) guideline tests. These tests consume 55% of 
all animals in safety testing in Europe, i.e. about 600,000 animals. With 
350-750 chemicals with multiple results per test, reproducibility (balanced 
accuracy) was 81% and 69% of toxic substances were found again in a repeat 
experiment (sensitivity 69%). Inspired by the increasingly used read-across 
approach, we created a new type of QSAR, which is based on similarity of 
chemicals and not on chemical descriptors. A landscape of the chemical universe 
using 10 million structures was calculated, when based on Tanimoto indices 
similar chemicals are close and dissimilar chemicals far from each other. This 
allows placing any chemical of interest into the map and evaluating the 
information available for surrounding chemicals. In a data fusion approach, in 
which 74 different properties were taken into consideration, machine learning 
(random forest) allowed a fivefold cross-validation for 190,000 (non-) hazard 
labels of chemicals for which nine hazards were predicted. The balanced accuracy 
of this approach was 87% with a sensitivity of 89%. Each prediction comes with a 
certainty measure based on the homogeneity of data and distance of neighbours. 
Ongoing developments and future opportunities are discussed.

© 2019 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and 
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2019.e170710
PMCID: PMC7015478
PMID: 32626447


103. Front Psychiatry. 2018 Apr 30;9:135. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00135. eCollection 
2018.

Candyflipping and Other Combinations: Identifying Drug-Drug Combinations from an 
Online Forum.

Chary M(1), Yi D(2), Manini AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, NewYork-Presbyterian Queens, Flushing, NY, 
United States.
(2)Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, NY, United States.
(3)Division of Medical Toxicology, Department of Emergency Medicine, The Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Flushing, NY, United States.

Novel psychoactive substances (NPS) refer to synthetic compounds or derivatives 
of more widely known substances of abuse that have emerged over the last two 
decades. Case reports suggest that users combine substances to achieve desired 
psychotropic experiences while reducing dysphoria and unpleasant somatic 
effects. However, the pattern of combining NPS has not been studied on a large 
scale. Here, we show that posts discussing NPS describe combining nootropics 
with sedative-hypnotics and stimulants with plant hallucinogens or psychiatric 
medications. Discussions that mention sedative-hypnotics most commonly also 
mention hallucinogens and stimulants. We analyzed 20 years of publicly available 
posts from Lycaeum, an Internet forum dedicated to sharing information about 
psychoactive substance use. We used techniques from natural language processing 
and machine learning to identify NPS and correlate patterns of co-mentions of 
substances across posts. We found that conversations mentioning synthetic 
hallucinogens tended to divide into those mentioning hallucinogens derived from 
amphetamine and those derived from ergot. Conversations that mentioned synthetic 
hallucinogens tended not to mention plant hallucinogens. Conversations that 
mention bath salts commonly mention sedative-hypnotics or nootropics while more 
canonical stimulants are discussed with plant hallucinogens and psychiatric 
medications. All types of substances are frequently compared to MDMA, DMT, 
cocaine, or atropine when trying to describe their effects. Our results provide 
the largest analysis to date of online descriptions of patterns of polysubstance 
use and further demonstrate the utility of social media in learning about trends 
in substance use. We anticipate this work to lead to a more detailed analysis of 
the knowledge contained online about the patterns of usage and effects of novel 
psychoactive substances.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00135
PMCID: PMC5936764
PMID: 29760666


104. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Jun;107(6):1373-1382. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1750. Epub 2020 
Feb 28.

Broad-Spectrum Profiling of Drug Safety via Learning Complex Network.

Liu K(1), Ding RF(1), Xu H(2), Qin YM(1), He QS(1), Du F(1), Zhang Y(1), Yao 
LX(3), You P(4), Xiang YP(2), Ji ZL(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, 
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science 
and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(4)Xiamen Xianyue Hospital, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(5)The Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Drug safety is a severe clinical pharmacology and toxicology problem that has 
caused immense medical and social burdens every year. Regretfully, a 
reproducible method to assess drug safety systematically and quantitatively is 
still missing. In this study, we developed an advanced machine learning model 
for de novo drug safety assessment by solving the multilayer drug-gene-adverse 
drug reaction (ADR) interaction network. For the first time, the drug safety was 
assessed in a broad landscape of 1,156 distinct ADRs. We also designed a 
parameter ToxicityScore to quantify the overall drug safety. Moreover, we 
determined association strength for every 3,807,631 gene-ADR interactions, which 
clues mechanistic exploration of ADRs. For convenience, we deployed the model as 
a web service ADRAlert-gene at http://www.bio-add.org/ADRAlert/. In summary, 
this study offers insights into prioritizing safe drug therapy. It helps reduce 
the attrition rate of new drug discovery by providing a reliable ADR profile in 
the early preclinical stage.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1750
PMCID: PMC7325315
PMID: 31868917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.


105. Environ Int. 2022 Jan 15;159:107025. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2021.107025. Epub 
2021 Dec 14.

Evaluation of a semi-automated data extraction tool for public health 
literature-based reviews: Dextr.

Walker VR(1), Schmitt CP(2), Wolfe MS(2), Nowak AJ(3), Kulesza K(3), Williams 
AR(4), Shin R(4), Cohen J(4), Burch D(4), Stout MD(2), Shipkowski KA(2), Rooney 
AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of the National Toxicology Program (DNTP), National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address: Walker.Vickie@nih.gov.
(2)Division of the National Toxicology Program (DNTP), National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Evidence Prime Inc, Krakow, Poland.
(4)ICF, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There has been limited development and uptake of machine-learning 
methods to automate data extraction for literature-based assessments. Although 
advanced extraction approaches have been applied to some clinical research 
reviews, existing methods are not well suited for addressing toxicology or 
environmental health questions due to unique data needs to support reviews in 
these fields.
OBJECTIVES: To develop and evaluate a flexible, web-based tool for 
semi-automated data extraction that: 1) makes data extraction predictions with 
user verification, 2) integrates token-level annotations, and 3) connects 
extracted entities to support hierarchical data extraction.
METHODS: Dextr was developed with Agile software methodology using a two-team 
approach. The development team outlined proposed features and coded the 
software. The advisory team guided developers and evaluated Dextr's performance 
on precision, recall, and extraction time by comparing a manual extraction 
workflow to a semi-automated extraction workflow using a dataset of 51 
environmental health animal studies.
RESULTS: The semi-automated workflow did not appear to affect precision rate 
(96.0% vs. 95.4% manual, p = 0.38), resulted in a small reduction in recall rate 
(91.8% vs. 97.0% manual, p < 0.01), and substantially reduced the median 
extraction time (436 s vs. 933 s per study manual, p < 0.01) compared to a 
manual workflow.
DISCUSSION: Dextr provides similar performance to manual extraction in terms of 
recall and precision and greatly reduces data extraction time. Unlike other 
tools, Dextr provides the ability to extract complex concepts (e.g., multiple 
experiments with various exposures and doses within a single study), properly 
connect the extracted elements within a study, and effectively limit the work 
required by researchers to generate machine-readable, annotated exports. The 
Dextr tool addresses data-extraction challenges associated with environmental 
health sciences literature with a simple user interface, incorporates the key 
capabilities of user verification and entity connecting, provides a platform for 
further automation developments, and has the potential to improve data 
extraction for literature reviews in this and other fields.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2021.107025
PMID: 34920276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Hazard Mater. 2022 Feb 5;423(Pt B):127141. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127141. 
Epub 2021 Sep 11.

Machine learning-based biomarkers identification from toxicogenomics - Bridging 
to regulatory relevant phenotypic endpoints.

Rahman SM(1), Lan J(2), Kaeli D(3), Dy J(3), Alshawabkeh A(4), Gu AZ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, 
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Civil Engineering, 
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, 
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, 
China.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, 
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, 
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, 
360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA; School of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, Cornell University, 263 Hollister Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
Electronic address: aprilgu@cornell.edu.

One of the major challenges in realization and implementations of the Tox21 
vision is the urgent need to establish quantitative link between in-vitro assay 
molecular endpoint and in-vivo regulatory-relevant phenotypic toxicity endpoint. 
Current toxicomics approach still mostly rely on large number of redundant 
markers without pre-selection or ranking, therefore, selection of relevant 
biomarkers with minimal redundancy would reduce the number of markers to be 
monitored and reduce the cost, time, and complexity of the toxicity screening 
and risk monitoring. Here, we demonstrated that, using time series toxicomics 
in-vitro assay along with machine learning-based feature selection (maximum 
relevance and minimum redundancy (MRMR)) and classification method (support 
vector machine (SVM)), an "optimal" number of biomarkers with minimum redundancy 
can be identified for prediction of phenotypic toxicity endpoints with good 
accuracy. We included two case studies for in-vivo carcinogenicity and Ames 
genotoxicity prediction, using 20 selected chemicals including model genotoxic 
chemicals and negative controls, respectively. The results suggested that, 
employing the adverse outcome pathway (AOP) concept, molecular endpoints based 
on a relatively small number of properly selected biomarker-ensemble involved in 
the conserved DNA-damage and repair pathways among eukaryotes, were able to 
predict both Ames genotoxicity endpoints and in-vivo carcinogenicity in rats. A 
prediction accuracy of 76% with AUC = 0.81 was achieved while predicting in-vivo 
carcinogenicity with the top-ranked five biomarkers. For Ames genotoxicity 
prediction, the top-ranked five biomarkers were able to achieve prediction 
accuracy of 70% with AUC = 0.75. However, the specific biomarkers identified as 
the top-ranked five biomarkers are different for the two different phenotypic 
genotoxicity assays. The top-ranked biomarkers for the in-vivo carcinogenicity 
prediction mainly focused on double strand break repair and DNA recombination, 
whereas the selected top-ranked biomarkers for Ames genotoxicity prediction are 
associated with base- and nucleotide-excision repair The method developed in 
this study will help to fill in the knowledge gap in phenotypic anchoring and 
predictive toxicology, and contribute to the progress in the implementation of 
tox 21 vision for environmental and health applications.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127141
PMID: 34560480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2020 Sep;105:106912. doi: 
10.1016/j.vascn.2020.106912. Epub 2020 Aug 14.

Twenty years of safety pharmacology model validation and the wider implications 
of this to drug discovery.

Pugsley MK(1), Bekele B(2), Griessel H(2), de Korte T(3), Authier S(4), Grobler 
AF(2), Markgraf CG(5), Curtis MJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Cytokinetics, South San Francisco, CA 94080, United States of America. 
Electronic address: mpugsley@cytokinetics.com.
(2)North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(3)Ncardia, Leiden 2333 BD, the Netherlands.
(4)Charles River Laboratories, Laval H7V 4B3, QC, Canada.
(5)Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Inc, Marlborough, MA 01752, United States of 
America.
(6)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, Rayne Institute, St Thomas' 
Hospital, London SE17EH, UK.

This editorial summarizes the content of the current themed issue of J Pharm Tox 
Methods derived from the 2019 Annual Safety Pharmacology Society (SPS) meeting 
held in Barcelona, Spain, and reflects on 20 years of innovation in the 
elaboration of methods for evaluating adversity, particularly during the 
nonclinical research phase. Given the success of safety pharmacology (SP) in the 
last 20 years, we propose that the rubric for SP method invention and validation 
be examined in more detail to explore whether it may have wider relevance to the 
drug discovery process. Articles arising from the Barcelona meeting are 
summarized here. They reflect current areas of controversy and innovation in SP. 
Not for the first time in recent years, the suitability of the No Observable 
Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) as a variable in SP was considered in an article 
derived from a survey of SPS members. It was found from the survey and concluded 
from the analysis that the NOAEL is not necessary for assessing the safety of a 
New Chemical Entity (NCE). The meeting included scientific content from more 
than 190 abstracts (reproduced in the current volume of J Pharm Tox Methods). 
The impact of the INSPIRE program on the educational endeavor of SP, 
cardiovascular SP with regard to hERG and advances in CiPA and stem cells 
assays, the use of the echocardiogram in SP, the applicability of deep learning 
methods in SP and toxicology studies, the role of biomarkers in renal SP 
studies, and advances in CNS SP are highlighted in this issue of the Journal. 
This continued innovation reflects a rubric in SP that identifies problems, 
seeks solutions and, importantly, validates the solutions. If there is a lesson 
to be learned from the 20 years of annual SP methods themed issues it is that 
drug discovery efforts may benefit from a more rigorous validation process for 
discovery methods, using positive and negative controls for validation, as is 
done in SP method validation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vascn.2020.106912
PMID: 32798702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.


108. J Cheminform. 2016 Sep 29;8:51. doi: 10.1186/s13321-016-0162-2. eCollection 
2016.

Computational methods for prediction of in vitro effects of new chemical 
structures.

Banerjee P(1), Siramshetty VB(2), Drwal MN(3), Preissner R(4).

Author information:
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Physiology, Charité - 
University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany ; Graduate School of Computational 
Systems Biology, Humboldt University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Experimental and Clinical Research Center 
(ECRC), Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany ; BB3R - Berlin 
Brandenburg 3R Graduate School, Free University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Physiology, Charité - 
University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany ; Laboratoire d'innovation 
thérapeutique, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(4)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Physiology, Charité - 
University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany ; Structural Bioinformatics Group, 
Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC), Charité - University Medicine 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany ; BB3R - Berlin Brandenburg 3R Graduate School, Free 
University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: With a constant increase in the number of new chemicals synthesized 
every year, it becomes important to employ the most reliable and fast in silico 
screening methods to predict their safety and activity profiles. In recent 
years, in silico prediction methods received great attention in an attempt to 
reduce animal experiments for the evaluation of various toxicological endpoints, 
complementing the theme of replace, reduce and refine. Various computational 
approaches have been proposed for the prediction of compound toxicity ranging 
from quantitative structure activity relationship modeling to molecular 
similarity-based methods and machine learning. Within the "Toxicology in the 
21st Century" screening initiative, a crowd-sourcing platform was established 
for the development and validation of computational models to predict the 
interference of chemical compounds with nuclear receptor and stress response 
pathways based on a training set containing more than 10,000 compounds tested in 
high-throughput screening assays.
RESULTS: Here, we present the results of various molecular similarity-based and 
machine-learning based methods over an independent evaluation set containing 647 
compounds as provided by the Tox21 Data Challenge 2014. It was observed that the 
Random Forest approach based on MACCS molecular fingerprints and a subset of 13 
molecular descriptors selected based on statistical and literature analysis 
performed best in terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve values. Further, we compared the individual and combined performance of 
different methods. In retrospect, we also discuss the reasons behind the 
superior performance of an ensemble approach, combining a similarity search 
method with the Random Forest algorithm, compared to individual methods while 
explaining the intrinsic limitations of the latter.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that, although prediction methods were 
optimized individually for each modelled target, an ensemble of similarity and 
machine-learning approaches provides promising performance indicating its broad 
applicability in toxicity prediction.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-016-0162-2
PMCID: PMC5043617
PMID: 28316649


109. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2022 Apr;47(8):2266-2272. doi: 
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20211129.601.

[Establishment of multiple evidence-integrated evaluation and prediction method 
for "toxic" Chinese medicines].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui HR(1), Zhang XY(1), You LZ(1), Zheng R(1), Chen Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Zhang 
JJ(1), Shang HC(1).

Author information:
(1)Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine Beijing 100700, 
China.

Traditional Chinese medicine(TCM) carries the experience and theoretical 
knowledge of the ancients, and the use of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines is 
a major feature and advantage of TCM. &quot;Toxic&quot; Chinese medicines have 
unique clinical value and certain medication risk under the guidance of TCM 
theories such as compatibility for detoxification and treatment based on 
syndrome differentiation. In recent years, the safety events of Chinese 
medicines have occurred frequently, which has made the safety of Chinese 
medicine a public concern in China and abroad. However, limited by conventional 
cognitive laws and technical methods, basic research on toxicity of Chinese 
medicines fails to be combined with the clinical application. As a result, it is 
difficult to identify the clinical characteristics of, predict toxic and side 
effects of, or form a universal precise medication regimen for &quot;toxic&quot; 
Chinese medicines, which restricts the clinical application of them. In view of 
the problem that the toxicity of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines is 
difficult to be predicted and restricts the clinical application, the 
evidence-based research concept will provide new ideas for safe applcation of 
them in clinical practice. The integrated development of multiple disciplines 
and techniques in the field of big data and artificial intelligence will also 
promote the renewal and development of the research models for &quot;toxic&quot; 
Chinese medicines. Our team tried to propose the academic concept of 
evidence-based Chinese medicine toxicology and establish the data-intelligence 
research mode for &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines and the intelligent risk 
prediction method for medicinal combination in the early stage, which provided 
methodological supports for solving the above problem. Thus, on the basis of 
summarizing the research status and problems of the clinical medication regimen 
of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines, our team took the evidence-based 
toxicology of TCM as the core concept, and tried to construct the 
multiple-evidence integrated evaluation and prediction method for 
&quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicine, so as to guide the establishment of the 
non-toxic medication regimen of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines. 
Specifically, through the analysis of multivariate data obtained from the basic 
research, the evidence-based toxicology database of Chinese medicines and the 
individualized &quot;toxicity-effect&quot; intelligent prediction platform were 
built based on the disease-syndrome virtual patients, so as to identify the 
clinical characteristics and risks of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines and 
develop individualized medication regime. This study is expected to provide a 
methodological reference for the establishment of medication regimen and risk 
prevention strategy for &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese medicines. The method 
established in this study will bridge clinical research and basic research, 
enhance the transformation of the scientific connotation of attenuated 
compatibility, promote the development of evidence-based Chinese medicine 
toxicology, and ensure the clinical safety of &quot;toxic&quot; Chinese 
medicines.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20211129.601
PMID: 35531744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Front Toxicol. 2022 Sep 20;4:981928. doi: 10.3389/ftox.2022.981928. eCollection 
2022.

Novel machine learning models to predict endocrine disruption activity for 
high-throughput chemical screening.

Collins SP(1), Barton-Maclaren TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Existing Substances Risk Assessment Bureau, Healthy Environments and Consumer 
Safety Branch, Health Canada Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

An area of ongoing concern in toxicology and chemical risk assessment is 
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs). However, thousands of legacy chemicals 
lack the toxicity testing required to assess their respective EDC potential, and 
this is where computational toxicology can play a crucial role. The US (United 
States) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has run two programs, the 
Collaborative Estrogen Receptor Activity Project (CERAPP) and the Collaborative 
Modeling Project for Receptor Activity (CoMPARA) which aim to predict estrogen 
and androgen activity, respectively. The US EPA solicited research groups from 
around the world to provide endocrine receptor activity Qualitative (or 
Quantitative) Structure Activity Relationship ([Q]SAR) models and then combined 
them to create consensus models for different toxicity endpoints. Random Forest 
(RF) models were developed to cover a broader range of substances with high 
predictive capabilities using large datasets from CERAPP and CoMPARA for 
estrogen and androgen activity, respectively. By utilizing simple descriptors 
from open-source software and large training datasets, RF models were created to 
expand the domain of applicability for predicting endocrine disrupting activity 
and help in the screening and prioritization of extensive chemical inventories. 
In addition, RFs were trained to conservatively predict the activity, meaning 
models are more likely to make false-positive predictions to minimize the number 
of False Negatives. This work presents twelve binary and multi-class RF models 
to predict binding, agonism, and antagonism for estrogen and androgen receptors. 
The RF models were found to have high predictive capabilities compared to other 
in silico modes, with some models reaching balanced accuracies of 93% while 
having coverage of 89%. These models are intended to be incorporated into 
evolving priority-setting workflows and integrated strategies to support the 
screening and selection of chemicals for further testing and assessment by 
identifying potential endocrine-disrupting substances.

Copyright © 2022 Collins and Barton-Maclaren.

DOI: 10.3389/ftox.2022.981928
PMCID: PMC9530987
PMID: 36204696

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


111. SLAS Discov. 2022 Jan;27(1):29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.slasd.2021.10.014. Epub 2021 
Oct 27.

Deep Learning Image Analysis of High-Throughput Toxicology Assay Images.

Tandon A(1), Howard B(1), Ramaiahgari S(2), Maharana A(1), Ferguson S(2), Shah 
R(3), Merrick BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Sciome LLC, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)National Toxicology Program Division, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Sciome LLC, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
ruchir.shah@sciome.com.

High-throughput chemical screening approaches often employ microscopy to capture 
photomicrographs from multi-well cell culture plates, generating thousands of 
images that require time-consuming human analysis. To automate this subjective 
and time-consuming manual process, we have developed a method that uses deep 
learning to automatically classify digital assay images. We have trained a 
convolutional neural network (CNN) to perform binary and multi-class 
classification. The binary classifier binned assay images into healthy 
(comparable to untreated controls) and altered (not comparable to 
untreated-control) classes with >98% accuracy; the multi-class classifier 
assigned "Healthy," "Intermediate" and "Altered" labels to assay images with 
>95% accuracy. Our dataset comprised high-resolution assay images from primary 
human hepatocytes and undifferentiated (proliferating) and differentiated 2D 
cultures of HepaRG cells. In this study we have focused on testing and 
fine-tuning various CNN architectures, including ResNet 34, 50 and 101. To 
visualize regions in the images that the CNN model used for classification, we 
employed Class Activation Maps (CAM). This allowed us to better understand the 
inner workings of the neural network and led to additional optimizations of the 
algorithm. The results indicate a strong correspondence between dosage and 
classifier-predicted scores, suggesting that these scores might be useful in 
further characterizing benchmark dose. Together, these results clearly 
demonstrate that deep-learning based automated image classification of cell 
morphology changes upon chemical-induced stress can yield highly accurate and 
reproducible assessments of cytotoxicity across a variety of cell types.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.slasd.2021.10.014
PMCID: PMC8955414
PMID: 35058173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of 
this paper.


112. Front Big Data. 2019 Jul 17;2:25. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2019.00025. eCollection 
2019.

Novel Computational Approach to Predict Off-Target Interactions for Small 
Molecules.

Rao MS(1), Gupta R(2), Liguori MJ(1), Hu M(3), Huang X(3), Mantena SR(1), 
Mittelstadt SW(1), Blomme EAG(1), Van Vleet TR(1).

Author information:
(1)Global Preclinical Safety, Abbvie, North Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Information Research, Abbvie, North Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Discovery and Early Pipeline Statistics, Abbvie, North Chicago, IL, United 
States.

Most small molecule drugs interact with unintended, often unknown, biological 
targets and these off-target interactions may lead to both preclinical and 
clinical toxic events. Undesired off-target interactions are often not detected 
using current drug discovery assays, such as experimental polypharmacological 
screens. Thus, improvement in the early identification of off-target 
interactions represents an opportunity to reduce safety-related attrition rates 
during preclinical and clinical development. In order to better identify 
potential off-target interactions that could be linked to predictable safety 
issues, a novel computational approach to predict safety-relevant interactions 
currently not covered was designed and evaluated. These analyses, termed 
Off-Target Safety Assessment (OTSA), cover more than 7,000 targets (~35% of the 
proteome) and > 2,46,704 preclinical and clinical alerts (as of January 20, 
2019). The approach described herein exploits a highly curated training set of 
>1 million compounds (tracking >20 million compound-structure activity 
relationship/SAR data points) with known in vitro activities derived from 
patents, journals, and publicly available databases. This computational process 
was used to predict both the primary and secondary pharmacological activities 
for a selection of 857 diverse small molecule drugs for which extensive 
secondary pharmacology data are readily available (456 discontinued and 401 FDA 
approved). The OTSA process predicted a total of 7,990 interactions for these 
857 molecules. Of these, 3,923 and 4,067 possible high-scoring interactions were 
predicted for the discontinued and approved drugs, respectively, translating to 
an average of 9.3 interactions per drug. The OTSA process correctly identified 
the known pharmacological targets for >70% of these drugs, but also predicted a 
significant number of off-targets that may provide additional insight into 
observed in vivo effects. About 51.5% (2,025) and 22% (900) of these predicted 
high-scoring interactions have not previously been reported for the discontinued 
and approved drugs, respectively, and these may have a potential for repurposing 
efforts. Moreover, for both drug categories, higher promiscuity was observed for 
compounds with a MW range of 300 to 500, TPSA of ~200, and clogP ≥7. This 
computation also revealed significantly lower promiscuity (i.e., number of 
confirmed off-targets) for compounds with MW > 700 and MW<200 for both 
categories. In addition, 15 internal small molecules with known off-target 
interactions were evaluated. For these compounds, the OTSA framework not only 
captured about 56.8% of in vitro confirmed off-target interactions, but also 
identified the right pharmacological targets for 14 compounds as one of the top 
scoring targets. In conclusion, the OTSA process demonstrates good predictive 
performance characteristics and represents an additional tool with utility 
during the lead optimization stage of the drug discovery process. Additionally, 
the computed physiochemical properties such as clogP (i.e., lipophilicity), 
molecular weight, pKa and logS (i.e., solubility) were found to be statistically 
different between the approved and discontinued drugs, but the internal 
compounds were close to the approved drugs space in most part.

Copyright © 2019 Rao, Gupta, Liguori, Hu, Huang, Mantena, Mittelstadt, Blomme 
and Van Vleet.

DOI: 10.3389/fdata.2019.00025
PMCID: PMC7931946
PMID: 33693348


113. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2019 Sep 15;179:71-78. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.04.035. Epub 2019 Apr 23.

QSAR modelling study of the bioconcentration factor and toxicity of organic 
compounds to aquatic organisms using machine learning and ensemble methods.

Ai H(1), Wu X(2), Zhang L(1), Qi M(2), Zhao Y(2), Zhao Q(3), Zhao J(2), Liu 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Computer Simulating and Information Processing of 
Bio-macromolecules of Shenyang, China; Engineering Laboratory for Molecular 
Simulation and Designing of Drug Molecules of Liaoning, Shenyang, 110036, China; 
School of Life Science, Liaoning University, Shenyang, 110036, China.
(2)School of Life Science, Liaoning University, Shenyang, 110036, China.
(3)School of Mathematics, Liaoning University, Shenyang, 110036, China.
(4)Research Center for Computer Simulating and Information Processing of 
Bio-macromolecules of Shenyang, China; Engineering Laboratory for Molecular 
Simulation and Designing of Drug Molecules of Liaoning, Shenyang, 110036, China; 
School of Life Science, Liaoning University, Shenyang, 110036, China. Electronic 
address: liuhongsheng@lnu.edu.cn.

Bioconcentration factors and median lethal concentrations (LC50s) are important 
when assessing risks posed by organic pollutants to aquatic ecosystems. Various 
quantitative structure-activity relationship models have been developed to 
predict bioconcentration factors and classify acute toxicity. In the study, we 
developed a regression model using Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) method 
combined with the Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm. We calculated 2D 
molecular descriptors from a dataset containing 450 diverse chemicals in our 
regression model. Then we built three ensemble models using three machine 
learning algorithms and calculated 12 molecular fingerprints from a dataset 
containing 400 diverse chemicals in our classification models. In the regression 
model, the R2 and Rpred2 for the regression model were 0.860 and 0.757, 
respectively. Other parameters indicated that the regression model made good 
predictions and could efficiently predict a new set of compounds following 
standards set by Golbraikh, Tropsha, and Roy. In the classification models, the 
ensemble-SVM classification model gave an overall accuracy, sensitivity, 
specificity, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 92.2, 
95.1, 86.0, and 0.965, respectively, in a five-fold cross-validation and of 
87.3, 92.6, 76.0, and 0.940, respectively, in an external validation. These 
parameters indicated that our ensemble-SVM model was more stable and gave more 
accurate predictions than previous models. The model could therefore be used to 
effectively predict aquatic toxicity and assess risks posed to aquatic 
ecosystems. We identified several structures most relevant to acute aquatic 
toxicity through predictions made by the two types of models, and this 
information may be important to aquatic toxicology experiments and aquatic 
system management.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.04.035
PMID: 31026752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Dec 4;8:889. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00889. eCollection 
2017.

vNN Web Server for ADMET Predictions.

Schyman P(1), Liu R(1), Desai V(1), Wallqvist A(1).

Author information:
(1)DoD Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software Applications Institute, 
Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical Research 
and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD, United States.

In drug development, early assessments of pharmacokinetic and toxic properties 
are important stepping stones to avoid costly and unnecessary failures. 
Considerable progress has recently been made in the development of 
computer-based (in silico) models to estimate such properties. Nonetheless, such 
models can be further improved in terms of their ability to make predictions 
more rapidly, easily, and with greater reliability. To address this issue, we 
have used our vNN method to develop 15 absorption, distribution, metabolism, 
excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) prediction models. These models quickly assess 
some of the most important properties of potential drug candidates, including 
their cytotoxicity, mutagenicity, cardiotoxicity, drug-drug interactions, 
microsomal stability, and likelihood of causing drug-induced liver injury. Here 
we summarize the ability of each of these models to predict such properties and 
discuss their overall performance. All of these ADMET models are publically 
available on our website (https://vnnadmet.bhsai.org/), which also offers the 
capability of using the vNN method to customize and build new models.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00889
PMCID: PMC5722789
PMID: 29255418


115. Toxicol Pathol. 2019 Jun;47(4):436-443. doi: 10.1177/0192623319827485. Epub 2019 
Feb 5.

Toxicologic Pathology Forum*: Opinion on Integrating Innovative Digital 
Pathology Tools in the Regulatory Framework.

Gauthier BE(1), Gervais F(2), Hamm G(3), O'Shea D(4), Piton A(5), Schumacher 
VL(6).

Author information:
(1)1 Sanofi, Montpellier, France.
(2)2 Citoxlab, Evreux Cedex, France.
(3)3 Pathology Sciences, Drug Safety and Metabolism IMED Biotech Unit, 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)4 Deciphex, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)5 ALP Quality Systems, Biot, France.
(6)6 Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche 
Innovation Center, Basel, Switzerland.

Digital pathology is defined as the ability to examine digitized microscopic 
slides and to generate qualitative and quantitative data. The field of digital 
pathology is rapidly evolving and has the potential to revolutionize toxicologic 
pathology. Techniques such as automated 2-D image analysis, whole slide imaging, 
and telepathology are already considered "mature" technologies and have been 
used for decades in exploratory studies; however, many organizations are 
reluctant to use digital pathology in regulatory toxicology studies. Innovative 
technologies using digitized slides including high-content imaging modalities 
and artificial intelligence are still under development but are increasingly 
used in toxicologic pathology. While software validation requirements are 
already described, clear guidance for application of these rules to the digital 
pathology field are few and the acceptance of these technologies by regulatory 
authorities remains necessary for successful adoption of digital pathology into 
the mainstream of toxicologic pathology. This topic was discussed during a 
roundtable at the 2018 Annual Congress of the French Society of Toxicologic 
Pathology. This opinion article summarizes the discussion regarding the current 
questions and challenges on the integration of innovative digital pathology 
tools within a good laboratory practice framework and is meant to stimulate 
further discussion among the toxicologic pathology community. *This is an 
opinion article submitted to the Toxicologic Pathology Forum and does not 
constitute an official position of the Society of Toxicologic Pathology or the 
journal Toxicologic Pathology. The views expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily represent the policies, positions, or 
opinions of their respective agencies and organizations. The Toxicologic Forum 
is designed to stimulate broad discussion of topics relevant to regulatory 
issues in Toxicologic pathology. Readers of Toxicologic Pathology are encouraged 
to send their thoughts on these articles or ideas for new topics to 
toxicologicpathologyforum@toxpath.org .

DOI: 10.1177/0192623319827485
PMID: 30722763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Epigenomics. 2011 Dec;3(6):761-70. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.101.

DNA methylation topology: potential of a chromatin landmark for epigenetic drug 
toxicology.

Tajbakhsh J(1).

Author information:
(1)Chromatin Biology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. tajbakhshj@cshs.org

Targeting chromatin and its basic components through epigenetic drug therapy has 
become an increased focus in the treatment of complex diseases. This boost calls 
for the implementation of high-throughput cell-based assays that exploit the 
increasing knowledge about epigenetic mechanisms and their interventions for 
genotoxicity testing of epigenetic drugs. 3D quantitative DNA methylation 
imaging is a novel approach for detecting drug-induced DNA demethylation and 
concurrent heterochromatin decondensation/reorganization in cells through the 
analysis of differential nuclear distribution patterns of methylcytosine and 
gDNA visualized by fluorescence and processed by machine-learning algorithms. 
Utilizing 3D DNA methylation patterns is a powerful precursor to a series of 
fully automatable assays that employ chromatin structure and higher organization 
as novel pharmacodynamic biomarkers for various epigenetic drug actions.

DOI: 10.2217/epi.11.101
PMCID: PMC3250213
PMID: 22126294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Pest Manag Sci. 2022 Aug;78(8):3215-3225. doi: 10.1002/ps.6884. Epub 2022 Apr 
12.

RNA meets toxicology: efficacy indicators from the experimental design of RNAi 
studies for insect pest management.

List F(1), Tarone AM(1), Zhu-Salzman K(1), Vargo EL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.

RNA interference (RNAi) selectively targets genes and silences their expression 
in vivo, causing developmental defects, mortality and altered behavior. 
Consequently, RNAi has emerged as a promising research area for insect pest 
management. However, it is not yet a viable alternative over conventional 
pesticides despite several theoretical advantages in safety and specificity. As 
a first step toward a more standardized approach, a machine learning algorithm 
was used to identify factors that predict trial efficacy. Current research on 
RNAi for pest management is highly variable and relatively unstandardized. The 
applied random forest model was able to reliably predict mortality ranges based 
on bioassay parameters with 72.6% accuracy. Response time and target gene were 
the most important variables in the model, followed by applied dose, 
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) construct size and target species, further supported 
by generalized linear mixed effect modeling. Our results identified informative 
trends, supporting the idea that basic principles of toxicology apply to RNAi 
bioassays and provide initial guidelines standardizing future research similar 
to studies of traditional insecticides. We advocate for training that integrates 
genetic, organismal, and toxicological approaches to accelerate the development 
of RNAi as an effective tool for pest management. © 2022 The Authors. Pest 
Management Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society of 
Chemical Industry.

© 2022 The Authors. Pest Management Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6884
PMCID: PMC9541735
PMID: 35338587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.


118. Sci Total Environ. 2021 May 20;770:144561. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144561. 
Epub 2021 Jan 17.

Trends in predictive biodegradation for sustainable mitigation of environmental 
pollutants: Recent progress and future outlook.

Singh AK(1), Bilal M(2), Iqbal HMN(3), Raj A(4).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, Environmental Toxicology Group, 
CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Vishvigyan Bhawan, 31, 
Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, Uttar Pradesh, India; Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India.
(2)School of Life Science and Food Engineering, Huaiyin Institute of Technology, 
Huaian 223003, China.
(3)Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, Monterrey 
64849, Mexico. Electronic address: hafiz.iqbal@tec.mx.
(4)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, Environmental Toxicology Group, 
CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Vishvigyan Bhawan, 31, 
Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, Uttar Pradesh, India; Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India. Electronic address: 
araj@iitr.res.in.

The feasibility of in-silico techniques, together with the computational 
framework, has been applied to predictive bioremediation aiming to clean-up 
contaminants, toxicity evaluation, and possibilities for the degradation of 
complex recalcitrant compounds. Emerging contaminants from different industries 
have posed a significant hazard to the environment and public health. Given 
current bioremediation strategies, it is often a failure or inadequate for 
sustainable mitigation of hazardous pollutants. However, clear-cut vital 
information about biodegradation is quite incomplete from a conventional 
remediation techniques perspective. Lacking complete information on 
bio-transformed compounds leads to seeking alternative methods. Only scarce 
information about the transformed products and toxicity profile is available in 
the published literature. To fulfill this literature gap, various computational 
or in-silico technologies have emerged as alternating techniques, which are 
being recognized as in-silico approaches for bioremediation. Molecular docking, 
molecular dynamics simulation, and biodegradation pathways predictions are the 
vital part of predictive biodegradation, including the Quantitative 
Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR), Quantitative structure-biodegradation 
relationship (QSBR) model system. Furthermore, machine learning (ML), artificial 
neural network (ANN), genetic algorithm (GA) based programs offer simultaneous 
biodegradation prediction along with toxicity and environmental fate prediction. 
Herein, we spotlight the feasibility of in-silico remediation approaches for 
various persistent, recalcitrant contaminants while traditional bioremediation 
fails to mitigate such pollutants. Such could be addressed by exploiting 
described model systems and algorithm-based programs. Furthermore, recent 
advances in QSAR modeling, algorithm, and dedicated biodegradation prediction 
system have been summarized with unique attributes.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144561
PMID: 33736422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


119. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 Sep 20;34(9):1984-2002. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00219. Epub 2021 Aug 16.

Advances in Smoking Related In Vitro Inhalation Toxicology: A Perspective Case 
of Challenges and Opportunities from Progresses in Lung-on-Chip Technologies.

Singh AV(1), Maharjan RS(1), Kromer C(1), Laux P(1), Luch A(1), Vats T(2), 
Chandrasekar V(3), Dakua SP(3), Park BW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Product Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk 
Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, Berlin 10589, Germany.
(2)KNIPSS Management Institute, Faridipur Campus, NH 96, Faizabad-Allahabad 
Road, Sultanpur 228119, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Surgery, Hamad Medical Corporation, PO Box 3050, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering, Rayen School of Engineering, Youngstown 
State University, Youngstown 44555, Ohio, United States.

The inhalation toxicology of multifaceted particulate matter from the 
environment, cigarette smoke, and e-cigarette liquid vapes is a major research 
topic concerning the adverse effect of these items on lung tissue. In vitro 
air-liquid interface (ALI) culture models hold more potential in an inhalation 
toxicity assessment. Apropos to e-cigarette toxicity, the multiflavor components 
of the vapes pose a complex experimental bottleneck. While an appropriate ALI 
setup has been one part of the focus to overcome this, parallel attention 
towards the development of an ideal exposure system has pushed the field 
forward. With the advent of microfluidic devices, lung-on-chip (LOC) 
technologies show enormous opportunities in in vitro smoke-related inhalation 
toxicity. In this review, we provide a framework, establish a paradigm about 
smoke-related inhalation toxicity testing in vitro, and give a brief overview of 
breathing LOC experimental design concepts. The capabilities with optimized 
bioengineering approaches and microfluidics and their fundamental pros and cons 
are presented with specific case studies. The LOC model can imitate the 
structural, functional, and mechanical properties of human alveolar-capillary 
interface and are more reliable than conventional in vitro models. Finally, we 
outline current perspective challenges as well as opportunities of future 
development to smoking lungs-on-chip technologies based on advances in soft 
robotics, machine learning, and bioengineering.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00219
PMID: 34397218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Environ Res. 2022 Apr 1;205:112574. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112574. Epub 2021 
Dec 15.

IoT enabled environmental toxicology for air pollution monitoring using AI 
techniques.

Asha P(1), Natrayan L(2), Geetha BT(3), Beulah JR(4), Sumathy R(5), Varalakshmi 
G(6), Neelakandan S(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sathyabama Institute of 
Science and Technology, India.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Saveetha School of Engineering, SIMATS, 
India.
(3)Department of ECE, Saveetha School of Engineering, SIMATS, Saveetha 
University, India.
(4)Department of CSE, College of Engineering and Technology, Faculty of 
Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, SRM Nagar, 
Kattankulathur, India.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. 
Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and Technology, India.
(6)Lecturer in Computer Science, Telangana Social Welfare Degree College for 
Womens, Siddipet, India.
(7)Department of CSE, R.M.K Engineering College, India. Electronic address: 
snksnk17@gmail.com.

In past decades, the industrial and technological developments have increased 
exponentially and accompanied by non-judicial and un-sustainable utilization of 
non-renewable resources. At the same time, the environmental branch of 
toxicology has gained significant attention in understanding the effect of toxic 
chemicals on human health. Environmental toxic agents cause several diseases, 
particularly high risk among children, pregnant women, geriatrics and clinical 
patients. Since air pollution affects human health and results in increased 
morbidity and mortality increased the toxicological studies focusing on 
industrial air pollution absorbed by the common people. Therefore, it is needed 
to design an automated Environmental Toxicology based Air Pollution Monitoring 
System. To resolve the limitations of traditional monitoring system and to 
reduce the overall cost, this paper designs an IoT enabled Environmental 
Toxicology for Air Pollution Monitoring using Artificial Intelligence technique 
(ETAPM-AIT) to improve human health. The proposed ETAPM-AIT model includes a set 
of IoT based sensor array to sense eight pollutants namely NH3, CO, NO2, CH4, 
CO2, PM2.5, temperature and humidity. The sensor array measures the pollutant 
level and transmits it to the cloud server via gateways for analytic process. 
The proposed model aims to report the status of air quality in real time by 
using cloud server and sends an alarm in the presence of hazardous pollutants 
level in the air. For the classification of air pollutants and determining air 
quality, Artificial Algae Algorithm (AAA) based Elman Neural Network (ENN) model 
is used as a classifier, which predicts the air quality in the forthcoming time 
stamps. The AAA is applied as a parameter tuning technique to optimally 
determine the parameter values of the ENN model. In-order to examine the air 
quality monitoring performance of the proposed ETAPM-AIT model, an extensive set 
of simulation analysis is performed and the results are inspected in 5, 15, 30 
and 60 min of duration respectively. The experimental outcome highlights the 
optimal performance of the proposed ETAPM-AIT model over the recent techniques.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112574
PMID: 34919959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Front Chem. 2021 Jul 20;9:714678. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.714678. eCollection 
2021.

A Machine Learning Model to Predict Drug Transfer Across the Human Placenta 
Barrier.

Di Filippo JI(1)(2)(3), Bollini M(4), Cavasotto CN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Drug Design and Biomedical Informatics Laboratory, Instituto de 
Investigaciones en Medicina Traslacional (IIMT), CONICET-Universidad Austral, 
Pilar, Argentina.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Biomédicas and Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad 
Austral, Pilar, Argentina.
(3)Austral Institute for Applied Artificial Intelligence, Universidad Austral, 
Pilar, Argentina.
(4)Centro de Investigaciones en BioNanociencias (CIBION), Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The development of computational models for assessing the transfer of chemicals 
across the placental membrane would be of the utmost importance in drug 
discovery campaigns, in order to develop safe therapeutic options. We have 
developed a low-dimensional machine learning model capable of classifying 
compounds according to whether they can cross or not the placental barrier. To 
this aim, we compiled a database of 248 compounds with experimental information 
about their placental transfer, characterizing each compound with a set of ∼5.4 
thousand descriptors, including physicochemical properties and structural 
features. We evaluated different machine learning classifiers and implemented a 
genetic algorithm, in a five cross validation scheme, to perform feature 
selection. The optimization was guided towards models displaying a low number of 
false positives (molecules that actually cross the placental barrier, but are 
predicted as not crossing it). A Linear Discriminant Analysis model trained with 
only four structural features resulted to be robust for this task, exhibiting 
only one false positive case across all testing folds. This model is expected to 
be useful in predicting placental drug transfer during pregnancy, and thus could 
be used as a filter for chemical libraries in virtual screening campaigns.

Copyright © 2021 Di Filippo, Bollini and Cavasotto.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.714678
PMCID: PMC8329444
PMID: 34354979

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


122. J Toxicol Pathol. 2022 Apr;35(2):135-147. doi: 10.1293/tox.2021-0053. Epub 2021 
Nov 27.

Deep learning-based image-analysis algorithm for classification and 
quantification of multiple histopathological lesions in rat liver.

Shimazaki T(1), Deshpande A(2), Hajra A(2), Thomas T(2), Muta K(1), Yamada N(1), 
Yasui Y(1), Shoda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Toxicology Research Laboratories, Central Pharmaceutical Research Institute, 
Japan Tobacco Inc., 1-13-2 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, 
Japan.
(2)AIRA Matrix Private Limited, Dosti Pinnacle, 801, Rd Number 22, Wagle 
Industrial Estate, Thane, Maharashtra 400604, India.

Artificial intelligence (AI)-based image analysis is increasingly being used for 
preclinical safety-assessment studies in the pharmaceutical industry. In this 
paper, we present an AI-based solution for preclinical toxicology studies. We 
trained a set of algorithms to learn and quantify multiple typical 
histopathological findings in whole slide images (WSIs) of the livers of young 
Sprague Dawley rats by using a U-Net-based deep learning network. The trained 
algorithms were validated using 255 liver WSIs to detect, classify, and quantify 
seven types of histopathological findings (including vacuolation, bile duct 
hyperplasia, and single-cell necrosis) in the liver. The algorithms showed 
consistently good performance in detecting abnormal areas. Approximately 75% of 
all specimens could be classified as true positive or true negative. In general, 
findings with clear boundaries with the surrounding normal structures, such as 
vacuolation and single-cell necrosis, were accurately detected with high 
statistical scores. The results of quantitative analyses and classification of 
the diagnosis based on the threshold values between "no findings" and "abnormal 
findings" correlated well with diagnoses made by professional pathologists. 
However, the scores for findings ambiguous boundaries, such as hepatocellular 
hypertrophy, were poor. These results suggest that deep learning-based 
algorithms can detect, classify, and quantify multiple findings simultaneously 
on rat liver WSIs. Thus, it can be a useful supportive tool for a 
histopathological evaluation, especially for primary screening in rat toxicity 
studies.

©2022 The Japanese Society of Toxicologic Pathology.

DOI: 10.1293/tox.2021-0053
PMCID: PMC9018404
PMID: 35516841


123. Beilstein J Nanotechnol. 2015 Jul 27;6:1609-34. doi: 10.3762/bjnano.6.165. 
eCollection 2015.

The eNanoMapper database for nanomaterial safety information.

Jeliazkova N(1), Chomenidis C(2), Doganis P(2), Fadeel B(3), Grafström R(3), 
Hardy B(4), Hastings J(5), Hegi M(4), Jeliazkov V(1), Kochev N(6), Kohonen P(3), 
Munteanu CR(7), Sarimveis H(2), Smeets B(8), Sopasakis P(9), Tsiliki G(2), 
Vorgrimmler D(10), Willighagen E(8).

Author information:
(1)Ideaconsult Ltd., Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)National Technical University of Athens, School of Chemical Engineering, 
Athens, Greece.
(3)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Douglas Connect GmbH, Zeiningen, Switzerland.
(5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory - European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(6)Ideaconsult Ltd., Sofia, Bulgaria ; Department of Analytical Chemistry and 
Computer Chemistry, University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics, NUTRIM, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands ; Computer Science Faculty, University of A Coruna, A Coruña, Spain.
(8)Department of Bioinformatics, NUTRIM, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(9)National Technical University of Athens, School of Chemical Engineering, 
Athens, Greece ; IMT Institute for Advanced Studies Lucca, Lucca, Italy.
(10)in silico toxicology Gmbh (IST), Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The NanoSafety Cluster, a cluster of projects funded by the European 
Commision, identified the need for a computational infrastructure for 
toxicological data management of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs). Ontologies, 
open standards, and interoperable designs were envisioned to empower a 
harmonized approach to European research in nanotechnology. This setting 
provides a number of opportunities and challenges in the representation of 
nanomaterials data and the integration of ENM information originating from 
diverse systems. Within this cluster, eNanoMapper works towards supporting the 
collaborative safety assessment for ENMs by creating a modular and extensible 
infrastructure for data sharing, data analysis, and building computational 
toxicology models for ENMs.
RESULTS: The eNanoMapper database solution builds on the previous experience of 
the consortium partners in supporting diverse data through flexible data 
storage, open source components and web services. We have recently described the 
design of the eNanoMapper prototype database along with a summary of challenges 
in the representation of ENM data and an extensive review of existing 
nano-related data models, databases, and nanomaterials-related entries in 
chemical and toxicogenomic databases. This paper continues with a focus on the 
database functionality exposed through its application programming interface 
(API), and its use in visualisation and modelling. Considering the preferred 
community practice of using spreadsheet templates, we developed a configurable 
spreadsheet parser facilitating user friendly data preparation and data upload. 
We further present a web application able to retrieve the experimental data via 
the API and analyze it with multiple data preprocessing and machine learning 
algorithms.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate how the eNanoMapper database is used to import and 
publish online ENM and assay data from several data sources, how the 
"representational state transfer" (REST) API enables building user friendly 
interfaces and graphical summaries of the data, and how these resources 
facilitate the modelling of reproducible quantitative structure-activity 
relationships for nanomaterials (NanoQSAR).

DOI: 10.3762/bjnano.6.165
PMCID: PMC4578352
PMID: 26425413


124. Front Toxicol. 2022 Jun 22;4:893924. doi: 10.3389/ftox.2022.893924. eCollection 
2022.

Development of the InTelligence And Machine LEarning (TAME) Toolkit for 
Introductory Data Science, Chemical-Biological Analyses, Predictive Modeling, 
and Database Mining for Environmental Health Research.

Roell K(1), Koval LE(1)(2), Boyles R(3), Patlewicz G(4), Ring C(4), Rider CV(5), 
Ward-Caviness C(6), Reif DM(7), Jaspers I(1)(2)(8)(9)(10), Fry RC(1)(2)(8), 
Rager JE(1)(2)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Environmental Health Solutions, Gillings School of Global 
Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States.
(2)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States.
(3)Research Computing, RTI International, Durham, NC, United States.
(4)Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure, US Environmental Protection 
Agency, Durham, NC, United States.
(5)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Durham, NC, United States.
(6)Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(7)Bioinformatics Research Center, Department of Biological Sciences, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(8)Curriculum in Toxicology and Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(9)Center for Environmental Medicine, Asthma and Lung Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

Research in environmental health is becoming increasingly reliant upon data 
science and computational methods that can more efficiently extract information 
from complex datasets. Data science and computational methods can be leveraged 
to better identify relationships between exposures to stressors in the 
environment and human disease outcomes, representing critical information needed 
to protect and improve global public health. Still, there remains a critical gap 
surrounding the training of researchers on these in silico methods. We aimed to 
address this gap by developing the inTelligence And Machine lEarning (TAME) 
Toolkit, promoting trainee-driven data generation, management, and analysis 
methods to "TAME" data in environmental health studies. Training modules were 
developed to provide applications-driven examples of data organization and 
analysis methods that can be used to address environmental health questions. 
Target audiences for these modules include students, post-baccalaureate and 
post-doctorate trainees, and professionals that are interested in expanding 
their skillset to include recent advances in data analysis methods relevant to 
environmental health, toxicology, exposure science, epidemiology, and 
bioinformatics/cheminformatics. Modules were developed by study coauthors using 
annotated script and were organized into three chapters within a GitHub Bookdown 
site. The first chapter of modules focuses on introductory data science, which 
includes the following topics: setting up R/RStudio and coding in the R 
environment; data organization basics; finding and visualizing data trends; 
high-dimensional data visualizations; and Findability, Accessibility, 
Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) data management practices. The second 
chapter of modules incorporates chemical-biological analyses and predictive 
modeling, spanning the following methods: dose-response modeling; machine 
learning and predictive modeling; mixtures analyses; -omics analyses; 
toxicokinetic modeling; and read-across toxicity predictions. The last chapter 
of modules was organized to provide examples on environmental health database 
mining and integration, including chemical exposure, health outcome, and 
environmental justice indicators. Training modules and associated data are 
publicly available online 
(https://uncsrp.github.io/Data-Analysis-Training-Modules/). Together, this 
resource provides unique opportunities to obtain introductory-level training on 
current data analysis methods applicable to 21st century science and 
environmental health.

Copyright © 2022 Roell, Koval, Boyles, Patlewicz, Ring, Rider, Ward-Caviness, 
Reif, Jaspers, Fry and Rager.

DOI: 10.3389/ftox.2022.893924
PMCID: PMC9257219
PMID: 35812168

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor ST 
declared a past collaboration with the author JER.


125. Food Chem Toxicol. 2017 Sep;107(Pt A):150-166. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2017.05.041. 
Epub 2017 May 27.

Computational prediction of immune cell cytotoxicity.

Schrey AK(1), Nickel-Seeber J(1), Drwal MN(1), Zwicker P(2), Schultze N(2), 
Haertel B(2), Preissner R(3).

Author information:
(1)Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Institute for Physiology and ECRC, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)University of Greifswald, Institute of Pharmacy, Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Institute for Physiology and ECRC, 
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: robert.preissner@charite.de.

Immunotoxicity, defined as adverse effects of xenobiotics on the immune system, 
is gaining increasing attention in the approval process of industrial chemicals 
and drugs. In-vivo and ex-vivo experiments have been the gold standard in 
immunotoxicity assessment so far, so the development of in-vitro and in-silico 
alternatives is an important issue. In this paper we describe a widely 
applicable, easy-to use computational approach which can serve as an initial 
immunotoxicity screen of new chemical entities. Molecular fingerprints 
describing chemical structure were used as parameters in a machine-learning 
approach based on the Naïve-Bayes learning algorithm. The model was trained 
using blood-cell growth inhibition data from the NCI database and validated 
externally with several in-house and literature-derived data sets tested in 
cytotoxicity assays on different types on immune cells. Both cross-validations 
and external validations resulted in areas under the receiver operator curves 
(ROC/AUC) of 75% or higher. The classification of the validation data sets 
occurred with excellent specificities and fair to excellent selectivities, 
depending on the data set. This means that the probability of actual 
immunotoxicity is very high for compounds classified as immunotoxic, while the 
fraction of false negative predictions might vary. Thus, in a multistep 
immunotoxicity screening scheme, the classification as immunotoxic can be 
accepted without additional confirmation, while compounds classified as not 
immunotoxic will have to be subjected to further investigation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2017.05.041
PMID: 28558974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2014 May 15;9(5):e97640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097640. 
eCollection 2014.

Cross-platform toxicogenomics for the prediction of non-genotoxic 
hepatocarcinogenesis in rat.

Römer M(1), Eichner J(1), Metzger U(2), Templin MF(2), Plummer S(3), 
Ellinger-Ziegelbauer H(4), Zell A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Bioinformatics Tuebingen (ZBIT), University of Tuebingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(2)Natural and Medical Sciences Institute at the University of Tübingen, 
Reutlingen, Germany.
(3)CXR Biosciences, James Lindsay Place, Dundee Technopole, Dundee, Scotland, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Bayer Pharma AG, Wuppertal, Germany.

In the area of omics profiling in toxicology, i.e. toxicogenomics, 
characteristic molecular profiles have previously been incorporated into 
prediction models for early assessment of a carcinogenic potential and 
mechanism-based classification of compounds. Traditionally, the biomarker 
signatures used for model construction were derived from individual 
high-throughput techniques, such as microarrays designed for monitoring global 
mRNA expression. In this study, we built predictive models by integrating omics 
data across complementary microarray platforms and introduced new concepts for 
modeling of pathway alterations and molecular interactions between multiple 
biological layers. We trained and evaluated diverse machine learning-based 
models, differing in the incorporated features and learning algorithms on a 
cross-omics dataset encompassing mRNA, miRNA, and protein expression profiles 
obtained from rat liver samples treated with a heterogeneous set of substances. 
Most of these compounds could be unambiguously classified as genotoxic 
carcinogens, non-genotoxic carcinogens, or non-hepatocarcinogens based on 
evidence from published studies. Since mixed characteristics were reported for 
the compounds Cyproterone acetate, Thioacetamide, and Wy-14643, we reclassified 
these compounds as either genotoxic or non-genotoxic carcinogens based on their 
molecular profiles. Evaluating our toxicogenomics models in a repeated external 
cross-validation procedure, we demonstrated that the prediction accuracy of our 
models could be increased by joining the biomarker signatures across multiple 
biological layers and by adding complex features derived from cross-platform 
integration of the omics data. Furthermore, we found that adding these features 
resulted in a better separation of the compound classes and a more confident 
reclassification of the three undefined compounds as non-genotoxic carcinogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097640
PMCID: PMC4022579
PMID: 24830643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Simon Plummer is 
employed by CXR Biosciences and Micromatrices Associates Ltd. Co-author Heidrun 
Ellinger-Ziegelbauer is employed by Bayer Pharma AG. There are no patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


127. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Nov 22;17(Suppl 15):440. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-016-1292-2.

Integration of metabolomics, lipidomics and clinical data using a machine 
learning method.

Acharjee A(1)(2), Ament Z(1), West JA(1), Stanley E(1), Griffin JL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council, Elsie Widdowson Laboratory, 120 Fulbourn Road, 
Cambridge, CB1 9NL, UK.
(2)The Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, 
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.
(3)Medical Research Council, Elsie Widdowson Laboratory, 120 Fulbourn Road, 
Cambridge, CB1 9NL, UK. Jules.Griffin@mrc-hnr.cam.ac.uk.
(4)The Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, 
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK. 
Jules.Griffin@mrc-hnr.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The recent pandemic of obesity and the metabolic syndrome (MetS) has 
led to the realisation that new drug targets are needed to either reduce obesity 
or the subsequent pathophysiological consequences associated with excess weight 
gain. Certain nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) play a pivotal role in lipid and 
carbohydrate metabolism and have been highlighted as potential treatments for 
obesity. This realisation started a search for NR agonists in order to 
understand and successfully treat MetS and associated conditions such as insulin 
resistance, dyslipidaemia, hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, obesity and 
cardiovascular disease. The most studied NRs for treating metabolic diseases are 
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), PPAR-α, PPAR-γ, and 
PPAR-δ. However, prolonged PPAR treatment in animal models has led to adverse 
side effects including increased risk of a number of cancers, but how these 
receptors change metabolism long term in terms of pathology, despite many 
beneficial effects shorter term, is not fully understood. In the current study, 
changes in male Sprague Dawley rat liver caused by dietary treatment with a 
PPAR-pan (PPAR-α, -γ, and -δ) agonist were profiled by classical toxicology 
(clinical chemistry) and high throughput metabolomics and lipidomics approaches 
using mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: In order to integrate an extensive set of nine different multivariate 
metabolic and lipidomics datasets with classical toxicological parameters we 
developed a hypotheses free, data driven machine learning approach. From the 
data analysis, we examined how the nine datasets were able to model dose and 
clinical chemistry results, with the different datasets having very different 
information content.
CONCLUSIONS: We found lipidomics (Direct Infusion-Mass Spectrometry) data the 
most predictive for different dose responses. In addition, associations with the 
metabolic and lipidomic data with aspartate amino transaminase (AST), a hepatic 
leakage enzyme to assess organ damage, and albumin, indicative of altered liver 
synthetic function, were established. Furthermore, by establishing correlations 
and network connections between eicosanoids, phospholipids and triacylglycerols, 
we provide evidence that these lipids function as a key link between 
inflammatory processes and intermediary metabolism.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-016-1292-2
PMCID: PMC5133491
PMID: 28185575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Aug 3;55(15):10875-10887. doi: 
10.1021/acs.est.1c02656. Epub 2021 Jul 25.

Revealing Adverse Outcome Pathways from Public High-Throughput Screening Data to 
Evaluate New Toxicants by a Knowledge-Based Deep Neural Network Approach.

Ciallella HL(1), Russo DP(1)(2), Aleksunes LM(3), Grimm FA(4), Zhu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Rutgers University Camden, 
Camden, New Jersey 08103, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University Camden, Camden, New Jersey 08102, 
United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, 
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, United States.
(4)ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Inc., Annandale, New Jersey 08801, United 
States.

Traditional experimental testing to identify endocrine disruptors that enhance 
estrogenic signaling relies on expensive and labor-intensive experiments. We 
sought to design a knowledge-based deep neural network (k-DNN) approach to 
reveal and organize public high-throughput screening data for compounds with 
nuclear estrogen receptor α and β (ERα and ERβ) binding potentials. The target 
activity was rodent uterotrophic bioactivity driven by ERα/ERβ activations. 
After training, the resultant network successfully inferred critical 
relationships among ERα/ERβ target bioassays, shown as weights of 6521 edges 
between 1071 neurons. The resultant network uses an adverse outcome pathway 
(AOP) framework to mimic the signaling pathway initiated by ERα and identify 
compounds that mimic endogenous estrogens (i.e., estrogen mimetics). The k-DNN 
can predict estrogen mimetics by activating neurons representing several events 
in the ERα/ERβ signaling pathway. Therefore, this virtual pathway model, 
starting from a compound's chemistry initiating ERα activation and ending with 
rodent uterotrophic bioactivity, can efficiently and accurately prioritize new 
estrogen mimetics (AUC = 0.864-0.927). This k-DNN method is a potential 
universal computational toxicology strategy to utilize public high-throughput 
screening data to characterize hazards and prioritize potentially toxic 
compounds.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c02656
PMCID: PMC8713073
PMID: 34304572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Environ Health Perspect. 2022 May;130(5):56001. doi: 10.1289/EHP10343. Epub 2022 
May 17.

Systematic Evidence Map for Over One Hundred and Fifty Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances (PFAS).

Carlson LM(1), Angrish M(2), Shirke AV(3), Radke EG(3), Schulz B(4), Kraft A(3), 
Judson R(5), Patlewicz G(5), Blain R(6), Lin C(6), Vetter N(6), Lemeris C(6), 
Hartman P(6), Hubbard H(6), Arzuaga X(3), Davis A(3), Dishaw LV(2), Druwe IL(2), 
Hollinger H(1), Jones R(1), Kaiser JP(7), Lizarraga L(7), Noyes PD(3), Taylor 
M(2), Shapiro AJ(1), Williams AJ(5), Thayer KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Health & Environmental 
Effects Assessment Division (HEEAD), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. 
EPA), Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Chemical & Pollutant 
Assessment Division (CPAD), U.S. EPA, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Chemical & Pollutant 
Assessment Division (CPAD), U.S. EPA, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(4)Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU), Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure (CCTE), U.S. EPA, Durham, 
North Carolina, USA.
(6)ICF International, Fairfax, Virginia, USA.
(7)Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment, Chemical & Pollutant 
Assessment Division (CPAD), U.S. EPA, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2022 May;130(5):51303.

BACKGROUND: Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a large class of 
synthetic (man-made) chemicals widely used in consumer products and industrial 
processes. Thousands of distinct PFAS exist in commerce. The 2019 U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
(PFAS) Action Plan outlines a multiprogram national research plan to address the 
challenge of PFAS. One component of this strategy involves the use of systematic 
evidence map (SEM) approaches to characterize the evidence base for hundreds of 
PFAS.
OBJECTIVE: SEM methods were used to summarize available epidemiological and 
animal bioassay evidence for a set of  ∼ 150 PFAS that were prioritized in 2019 
by the U.S. EPA's Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure (CCTE) for in 
vitro toxicity and toxicokinetic assay testing.
METHODS: Systematic review methods were used to identify and screen literature 
using manual review and machine-learning software. The Populations, Exposures, 
Comparators, and Outcomes (PECO) criteria were kept broad to identify mammalian 
animal bioassay and epidemiological studies that could inform human hazard 
identification. A variety of supplemental content was also tracked, including 
information on in vitro model systems; exposure measurement-only studies in 
humans; and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME). Animal 
bioassay and epidemiology studies meeting PECO criteria were summarized with 
respect to study design, and health system(s) were assessed. Because animal 
bioassay studies with  ≥ 21-d exposure duration (or reproductive/developmental 
study design) were most useful to CCTE analyses, these studies underwent study 
evaluation and detailed data extraction. All data extraction is publicly 
available online as interactive visuals with downloadable metadata.
RESULTS: More than 40,000 studies were identified from scientific databases. 
Screening processes identified 44 animal and 148 epidemiology studies from the 
peer-reviewed literature and 95 animal and 50 epidemiology studies from gray 
literature that met PECO criteria. Epidemiological evidence (available for 15 
PFAS) mostly assessed the reproductive, endocrine, developmental, metabolic, 
cardiovascular, and immune systems. Animal evidence (available for 40 PFAS) 
commonly assessed effects in the reproductive, developmental, urinary, 
immunological, and hepatic systems. Overall, 45 PFAS had evidence across animal 
and epidemiology data streams.
DISCUSSION: Many of the  ∼ 150 PFAS were data poor. Epidemiological and animal 
evidence were lacking for most of the PFAS included in our search. By 
disseminating this information, we hope to facilitate additional assessment work 
by providing the initial scoping literature survey and identifying key research 
needs. Future research on data-poor PFAS will help support a more complete 
understanding of the potential health effects from PFAS exposures. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP10343.

DOI: 10.1289/EHP10343
PMCID: PMC9113544
PMID: 35580034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Cheminform. 2021 Sep 3;13(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00543-x.

Holistic evaluation of biodegradation pathway prediction: assessing multi-step 
reactions and intermediate products.

Tam JYC(1)(2), Lorsbach T(3), Schmidt S(4), Wicker JS(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, 1142, 
Auckland, New Zealand. tam@envipath.com.
(2)enviPath UG & Co. KG, Postfach 230062, 55051, Mainz, Germany. 
tam@envipath.com.
(3)enviPath UG & Co. KG, Postfach 230062, 55051, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Bayer AG, Crop Science Division, Environmental Safety, Alfred-Nobel-Straöe 
50, 40789, Monheim am Rhein , Germany.
(5)School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, 1142, 
Auckland, New Zealand.

The prediction of metabolism and biotransformation pathways of xenobiotics is a 
highly desired tool in environmental sciences, drug discovery, and 
(eco)toxicology. Several systems predict single transformation steps or complete 
pathways as series of parallel and subsequent steps. Their performance is 
commonly evaluated on the level of a single transformation step. Such an 
approach cannot account for some specific challenges that are caused by specific 
properties of biotransformation experiments. That is, missing transformation 
products in the reference data that occur only in low concentrations, e.g. 
transient intermediates or higher-generation metabolites. Furthermore, some 
rule-based prediction systems evaluate the performance only based on the defined 
set of transformation rules. Therefore, the performance of these models cannot 
be directly compared. In this paper, we introduce a new evaluation framework 
that extends the evaluation of biotransformation prediction from single 
transformations to whole pathways, taking into account multiple generations of 
metabolites. We introduce a procedure to address transient intermediates and 
propose a weighted scoring system that acknowledges the uncertainty of 
higher-generation metabolites. We implemented this framework in enviPath and 
demonstrate its strict performance metrics on predictions of in vitro 
biotransformation and degradation of xenobiotics in soil. Our approach is 
model-agnostic and can be transferred to other prediction systems. It is also 
capable of revealing knowledge gaps in terms of incompletely defined sets of 
transformation rules.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-021-00543-x
PMCID: PMC8414759
PMID: 34479624

Conflict of interest statement: Jörg Wicker is one of the founders of enviPath 
UG & Co. KG, a scientific software development company that develops and 
maintains enviPath. Jörg Wicker, Tim Lorsbach, and Jason Tam are employees of 
enviPath UG & Co. KG. Sebastian Schmidt is an employee of Bayer AG, a 
manufacturer of pharmaceutical, agricultural, and consumer health chemicals. The 
authors declare no competing interests.


131. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev. 2018;36(4):237-251. doi: 
10.1080/10590501.2018.1537155. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

Machine learning models for predicting endocrine disruption potential of 
environmental chemicals.

Chierici M(1), Giulini M(1), Bussola N(1)(2), Jurman G(1), Furlanello C(1).

Author information:
(1)a Fondazione Bruno Kessler , Trento , Italy.
(2)b Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento , Trento , Italy.

We introduce here ML4Tox, a framework offering Deep Learning and Support Vector 
Machine models to predict agonist, antagonist, and binding activities of 
chemical compounds, in this case for the estrogen receptor ligand-binding 
domain. The ML4Tox models have been developed with a 10 × 5-fold 
cross-validation schema on the training portion of the CERAPP ToxCast dataset, 
formed by 1677 chemicals, each described by 777 molecular features. On the 
CERAPP "All Literature" evaluation set (agonist: 6319 compounds; antagonist 
6539; binding 7283), ML4Tox significantly improved sensitivity over published 
results on all three tasks, with agonist: 0.78 vs 0.56; antagonist: 0.69 vs 
0.11; binding: 0.66 vs 0.26.

DOI: 10.1080/10590501.2018.1537155
PMID: 30628533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2020 Oct 1;202:110936. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110936. Epub 2020 Jul 11.

Zebrafish AC(50) modelling: (Q)SAR models to predict developmental toxicity in 
zebrafish embryo.

Lavado GJ(1), Gadaleta D(2), Toma C(2), Golbamaki A(2), Toropov AA(2), Toropova 
AP(2), Marzo M(2), Baderna D(2), Arning J(3), Benfenati E(2).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Department of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Via Mario 
Negri 2, 20156, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: giovanna.lavado@marionegri.it.
(2)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Department of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Via Mario 
Negri 2, 20156, Milan, Italy.
(3)Umweltbundesamt - German Federal Environment Agency, Wörlitzer Platz 1, 
06844, Dessau-Roßlau, Germany.

Developmental toxicity refers to the occurrence of adverse effects on a 
developing organism as a consequence of exposure to hazardous chemicals. The 
assessment of developmental toxicity has become relevant to the safety 
assessment process of chemicals. The zebrafish embryo developmental toxicology 
assay is an emerging test used to screen the teratogenic potential of chemicals 
and it is proposed as a promising test to replace teratogenic assays with 
animals. Supported by the increased availability of data from this test, the 
developmental toxicity assay with zebrafish has become an interesting endpoint 
for the in silico modelling. The purpose of this study was to build up 
quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models. In this work, new in 
silico models for the evaluation of developmental toxicity were built using a 
well-defined set of data from the ToxCastTM Phase I chemical library on the 
zebrafish embryo. Categorical and continuous QSAR models were built by gradient 
boosting machine learning and the Monte Carlo technique respectively, in 
accordance with Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
principles and their statistical quality was satisfactory. The classification 
model reached balanced accuracy 0.89 and Matthews correlation coefficient 0.77 
on the test set. The regression model reached correlation coefficient R2 0.70 in 
external validation and leave-one-out cross-validated Q2 0.73 in internal 
validation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110936
PMID: 32800219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Brief Bioinform. 2022 Sep 20;23(5):bbac257. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbac257.

AI for predicting chemical-effect associations at the chemical universe 
level-deepFPlearn.

Schor J(1), Scheibe P(2), Bernt M(1), Busch W(3), Lai C(4), Hackermüller 
J(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department Computational Biology, Helmholtz Centre for environmental research 
- UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Saxony, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurophysics, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Stephanstraβe 1a, 04103 Leipzig, Saxony, Germany.
(3)Department of Bioanalytical Ecotoxicology, Helmholtz Centre for environmental 
research - UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Saxony, Germany.
(4)Graduate Program in Software & School of Engineering, University of St. 
Thomas, 2115 Summit Ave, St. Paul, MN 55105, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Augustuspl. 10, 04109 
Leipzig, Saxony, Germany.

Many chemicals are present in our environment, and all living species are 
exposed to them. However, numerous chemicals pose risks, such as developing 
severe diseases, if they occur at the wrong time in the wrong place. For the 
majority of the chemicals, these risks are not known. Chemical risk assessment 
and subsequent regulation of use require efficient and systematic strategies. 
Lab-based methods-even if high throughput-are too slow to keep up with the pace 
of chemical innovation. Existing computational approaches are designed for 
specific chemical classes or sub-problems but not usable on a large scale. 
Further, the application range of these approaches is limited by the low amount 
of available labeled training data. We present the ready-to-use and stand-alone 
program deepFPlearn that predicts the association between chemical structures 
and effects on the gene/pathway level using a combined deep learning approach. 
deepFPlearn uses a deep autoencoder for feature reduction before training a deep 
feed-forward neural network to predict the target association. We received good 
prediction qualities and showed that our feature compression preserves relevant 
chemical structural information. Using a vast chemical inventory (unlabeled 
data) as input for the autoencoder did not reduce our prediction quality but 
allowed capturing a much more comprehensive range of chemical structures. We 
predict meaningful-experimentally verified-associations of chemicals and effects 
on unseen data. deepFPlearn classifies hundreds of thousands of chemicals in 
seconds. We provide deepFPlearn as an open-source and flexible tool that can be 
easily retrained and customized to different application settings at 
https://github.com/yigbt/deepFPlearn.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbac257
PMCID: PMC9487703
PMID: 35849097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Chem Res Toxicol. 2019 Nov 18;32(11):2338-2352. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00338. Epub 2019 Nov 1.

Computational Investigation of Drug Phototoxicity: Photosafety Assessment, 
Photo-Toxophore Identification, and Machine Learning.

Schmidt F(1), Wenzel J(1), Halland N(1), Güssregen S(1), Delafoy L(2), Czich 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Sanofi R&D , Industriepark Hoechst , 65926 Frankfurt , Germany.
(2)Sanofi R&D , Montpellier 34080 , France.

One of the most appreciated capabilities of computational toxicology is to 
support the design of pharmaceuticals with reduced toxicological hazard. To this 
end, we have strengthened our drug photosafety assessments by applying novel 
computer models for the anticipation of in vitro phototoxicity and human 
photosensitization. These models are typically used in pharmaceutical discovery 
projects as part of the compound toxicity assessments and compound optimization 
methods. To ensure good data quality and aiming at models with global 
applicability we separately compiled and curated highly chemically diverse data 
sets from 3T3 NRU phototoxicity reports (450 compounds) and clinical 
photosensitization alerts (1419 compounds) which are provided as supplements. 
The latter data gives rise to a comprehensive list of explanatory fragments for 
visual guidance, termed phototoxophores, by application of a Bayesian statistics 
approach. To extend beyond the domain of well sampled fragments we applied 
machine learning techniques based on explanatory descriptors such as 
pharmacophoric fingerprints or, more important, accurate electronic energy 
descriptors. Electronic descriptors were extracted from quantum chemical 
computations at the density functional theory (DFT) level. Accurate UV/vis 
spectral absorption descriptors and pharmacophoric fingerprints turned out to be 
necessary for predictive computer models, which were both derived from Deep 
Neural Networks but also the simpler Random Decision Forests approach. Model 
accuracies of 83-85% could typically be reached for diverse test data sets and 
other company in-house data, while model sensitivity (the capability of 
correctly detecting toxicants) was even better, reaching 86%-90%. Importantly, a 
computer model-triggered response-map allowed for graphical/chemical 
interpretability also in the case of previously unknown phototoxophores. The 
photosafety models described here are currently applied in a prospective manner 
for the hazard identification, prioritization, and optimization of newly 
designed molecules.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00338
PMID: 31625387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Altern Lab Anim. 2021 May;49(3):73-82. doi: 10.1177/02611929211029635. Epub 2021 
Jul 7.

Curated Data In - Trustworthy In Silico Models Out: The Impact of Data Quality 
on the Reliability of Artificial Intelligence Models as Alternatives to Animal 
Testing.

Alves VM(1), Auerbach SS(2), Kleinstreuer N(3), Rooney JP(4), Muratov EN(5)(6), 
Rusyn I(7), Tropsha A(5), Schmitt C(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of Data Science, Division of the National Toxicology Program (DNTP), 
6857National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, 
USA.
(2)Toxinformatics Group, Predictive Toxicology Branch, DNTP, NIEHS, Durham, NC, 
USA.
(3)National Toxicology Program Interagency Center for the Evaluation of 
Alternative Toxicological Methods, Scientific Director's Office, DNTP, NIEHS, 
Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Integrated Laboratory Systems, LLC, Morrisville, NC, USA.
(5)Laboratory for Molecular Modeling, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, 2331The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Federal University of Paraiba, Joao 
Pessoa, Paraiba, Brazil.
(7)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 
USA.

New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) that employ artificial intelligence (AI) for 
predicting adverse effects of chemicals have generated optimistic expectations 
as alternatives to animal testing. However, the major underappreciated challenge 
in developing robust and predictive AI models is the impact of the quality of 
the input data on the model accuracy. Indeed, poor data reproducibility and 
quality have been frequently cited as factors contributing to the crisis in 
biomedical research, as well as similar shortcomings in the fields of toxicology 
and chemistry. In this article, we review the most recent efforts to improve 
confidence in the robustness of toxicological data and investigate the impact 
that data curation has on the confidence in model predictions. We also present 
two case studies demonstrating the effect of data curation on the performance of 
AI models for predicting skin sensitisation and skin irritation. We show that, 
whereas models generated with uncurated data had a 7-24% higher correct 
classification rate (CCR), the perceived performance was, in fact, inflated 
owing to the high number of duplicates in the training set. We assert that data 
curation is a critical step in building computational models, to help ensure 
that reliable predictions of chemical toxicity are achieved through use of the 
models.

DOI: 10.1177/02611929211029635
PMCID: PMC8609471
PMID: 34233495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: AT and ENM are 
co-founders of Predictive, LLC, which develops computational methodologies and 
software for toxicity prediction. All the other authors declare no conflicting 
interests.


136. Toxicol Pathol. 2021 Jun;49(4):905-911. doi: 10.1177/0192623320981560. Epub 2021 
Jan 5.

Screening For Bone Marrow Cellularity Changes in Cynomolgus Macaques in 
Toxicology Safety Studies Using Artificial Intelligence Models.

Smith MA(1), Westerling-Bui T(2), Wilcox A(1), Schwartz J(1).

Author information:
(1)25913Charles River Laboratories, Reno, NV, USA.
(2)Aiforia Inc, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Many compounds affect the cellularity of hematolymphoid organs including bone 
marrow. Toxicologic pathologists are tasked with their evaluation as part of 
safety studies. An artificial intelligence (AI) tool could provide diagnostic 
support for the pathologist. We looked at the ability of a deep-learning AI 
model to evaluate whole slide images of macaque sternebrae to identify and 
enumerate bone marrow hematopoietic cells. The AI model was trained and able to 
differentiate the hematopoietic cells from the other sternebrae tissues. We 
compared the model to severity scores in a study with decreased hematopoietic 
cellularity. The mean cells/mm2 from the model was lower for each increase in 
severity score. The AI model was trained by 1 pathologist, providing proof of 
concept that AI model generation can be fast and agile, without the need of a 
cross disciplinary team and significant effort. We see great potential for the 
role of AI-based bone marrow screening.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623320981560
PMID: 33397208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Clin Chem. 2022 Jun 1;68(6):848-855. doi: 10.1093/clinchem/hvac045.

Towards a New Qualitative Screening Assay for Synthetic Cannabinoids Using 
Metabolomics and Machine Learning.

Streun GL(1), Steuer AE(1), Poetzsch SN(1), Ebert LC(2), Dobay A(3), Kraemer 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich Institute of 
Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Forensic Imaging/Virtopsy, Zurich Institute of Forensic 
Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Forensic Genetics, Zurich Institute of Forensic Medicine, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Synthetic cannabinoids (SCs) are steadily emerging on the drug 
market. To remain competitive in clinical or forensic toxicology, new screening 
strategies including high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) are required. 
Machine learning algorithms can detect and learn chemical signatures in complex 
datasets and use them as a proxy to predict new samples. We propose a new 
screening tool based on a SC-specific change of the metabolome and a machine 
learning algorithm.
METHODS: Authentic human urine samples (n = 474), positive or negative for SCs, 
were used. These samples were measured with an untargeted metabolomics liquid 
chromatography (LC)-quadrupole time-of-flight-HRMS method. Progenesis QI 
software was used to preprocess the raw data. Following feature engineering, a 
random forest (RF) model was optimized in R using a 10-fold cross-validation 
method and a training set (n = 369). The performance of the model was assessed 
with a test (n = 50) and a verification (n = 55) set.
RESULTS: During RF optimization, 49 features, 200 trees, and 7 variables at each 
branching node were determined as most predictive. The optimized model accuracy, 
clinical sensitivity, clinical specificity, positive predictive value, and 
negative predictive value were 88.1%, 83.0%, 92.7%, 91.3%, and 85.6%, 
respectively. The test set was predicted with an accuracy of 88.0%, and the 
verification set provided evidence that the model was able to detect 
cannabinoid-specific changes in the metabolome.
CONCLUSIONS: An RF approach combined with metabolomics enables a novel screening 
strategy for responding effectively to the challenge of new SCs. Biomarkers 
identified by this approach may also be integrated in routine screening methods.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2022. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/clinchem/hvac045
PMID: 35323873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biology (Basel). 2022 Jan 28;11(2):209. doi: 10.3390/biology11020209.

High-Throughput Chemical Screening and Structure-Based Models to Predict hERG 
Inhibition.

Krishna S(1), Borrel A(2), Huang R(3), Zhao J(3), Xia M(3), Kleinstreuer N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Research Triangle, NC 27560, USA.
(2)Silent Spring Institute, Newton, MA 02460, USA.
(3)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences (NCATS), Bethesda, MD 20892-4874, USA.

Chemical inhibition of the human ether-a -go-go-related gene (hERG) potassium 
channel leads to a prolonged QT interval that can contribute to severe 
cardiotoxicity. The adverse effects of hERG inhibition are one of the principal 
causes of drug attrition in clinical and pre-clinical development. Preliminary 
studies have demonstrated that a wide range of environmental chemicals and 
toxicants may also inhibit the hERG channel and contribute to the 
pathophysiology of cardiovascular (CV) diseases. As part of the US federal Tox21 
program, the National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS) applied 
a quantitative high throughput screening (qHTS) approach to screen the Tox21 
library of 10,000 compounds (~7871 unique chemicals) at 14 concentrations in 
triplicate to identify chemicals perturbing hERG activity in the U2OS cell line 
thallium flux assay platform. The qHTS cell-based thallium influx assay provided 
a robust and reliable dataset to evaluate the ability of thousands of drugs and 
environmental chemicals to inhibit hERG channel protein, and the use of chemical 
structure-based clustering and chemotype enrichment analysis facilitated the 
identification of molecular features that are likely responsible for the 
observed hERG activity. We employed several machine-learning approaches to 
develop QSAR prediction models for the assessment of hERG liabilities for 
drug-like and environmental chemicals. The training set was compiled by 
integrating hERG bioactivity data from the ChEMBL database with the Tox21 qHTS 
thallium flux assay data. The best results were obtained with the random forest 
method (~92.6% balanced accuracy). The data and scripts used to generate hERG 
prediction models are provided in an open-access format as key in vitro and in 
silico tools that can be applied in a translational toxicology pipeline for drug 
development and environmental chemical screening.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11020209
PMCID: PMC8869358
PMID: 35205076

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


139. Chem Sci. 2022 Jun 14;13(25):7594-7603. doi: 10.1039/d2sc02925a. eCollection 
2022 Jun 29.

Machine learning and semi-empirical calculations: a synergistic approach to 
rapid, accurate, and mechanism-based reaction barrier prediction.

Farrar EHE(1), Grayson MN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bath Claverton Down Bath BA2 7AY UK 
M.N.Grayson@bath.ac.uk.

Modern QM modelling methods, such as DFT, have provided detailed mechanistic 
insights into countless reactions. However, their computational cost inhibits 
their ability to rapidly screen large numbers of substrates and catalysts in 
reaction discovery. For a C-C bond forming nitro-Michael addition, we introduce 
a synergistic semi-empirical quantum mechanical (SQM) and machine learning (ML) 
approach that allows the prediction of DFT-quality reaction barriers in minutes, 
even on a standard laptop using widely available modelling software. Mean 
absolute errors (MAEs) are obtained that are below the accepted chemical 
accuracy threshold of 1 kcal mol-1 and substantially better than SQM methods 
without ML correction (5.71 kcal mol-1). Predictive power is shown to hold when 
the ML models are applied to an unseen set of compounds from the toxicology 
literature. Mechanistic insight is also achieved via the generation of full SQM 
transition state (TS) structures which are found to be very good approximations 
for the DFT-level geometries, revealing important steric interactions in some 
TSs. This combination of speed, accuracy, and mechanistic insight is 
unprecedented; current ML barrier models compromise on at least one of these 
important criteria.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2sc02925a
PMCID: PMC9242013
PMID: 35872815

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.


140. Chem Res Toxicol. 2021 Feb 15;34(2):601-615. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00423. Epub 2020 Dec 23.

Development of a Battery of In Silico Prediction Tools for Drug-Induced Liver 
Injury from the Vantage Point of Translational Safety Assessment.

Rathman J(1)(2), Yang C(1), Ribeiro JV(1), Mostrag A(1), Thakkar S(3), Tong 
W(3), Hobocienski B(1), Sacher O(1), Magdziarz T(1), Bienfait B(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Networks GmbH - Computerchemie (MN-AM), 90411 Nurnberg, Germany.
(2)Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio 43210, United States.
(3)National Center for Toxicology Research, United States Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, United States.

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) remains a challenge when translating knowledge 
from the preclinical stage to human use cases. Attempts to model human DILI 
directly based on the information from drug labels have had some success; 
however, the approach falls short of providing insights or addressing 
uncertainty due to the difficulty of decoupling the idiosyncratic nature of 
human DILI outcomes. Our approach in this comparative analysis is to leverage 
existing preclinical and clinical data as well as information on metabolism to 
better translate mammalian to human DILI. The human DILI knowledge base from the 
United States Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA) National Center for 
Toxicology Research contains 1036 pharmaceuticals from diverse therapeutic 
categories. A human DILI training set of 305 oral marketed drugs was prepared 
and a binary classification scheme applied. The second knowledge base consists 
of mammalian repeated dose toxicity with liver toxicity data from various 
regulatory sources. Within this knowledge base, we identified 278 
pharmaceuticals containing 198 marketed or withdrawn oral drugs with data from 
the U.S. FDA new drug application and 98 active pharmaceutical ingredients from 
ToxCast. From this collection, a set of 225 oral drugs was prepared as the 
mammalian hepatotoxicity training set with particular end points of pathology 
findings in the liver and bile duct. Both human and mammalian data sets were 
processed using various learning algorithms, including artificial intelligence 
approaches. The external validations for both models were comparable to the 
training statistics. These data sets were also used to extract 
species-differentiating chemotypes that differentiate DILI effects on humans 
from mammals. A systematic workflow was devised to predict human DILI and 
provide mechanistic insights. For a given query molecule, both human and 
mammalian models are run. If the predictions are discordant, both metabolites 
and parents are investigated for quantitative structure-activity relationship 
and species-differentiating chemotypes. Their results are combined using the 
Dempster-Shafer decision theory to yield a final outcome prediction for human 
DILI with estimated uncertainty. Finally, these tools are implementable within 
an in silico platform for systematic evaluation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.0c00423
PMID: 33356149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Environ Epidemiol. 2022 Feb 1;6(1):e193. doi: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000193. 
eCollection 2022 Feb.

The EXIMIOUS project-Mapping exposure-induced immune effects: connecting the 
exposome and the immunome.

Ronsmans S(1), Sørig Hougaard K(2), Nawrot TS(1)(3), Plusquin M(3), Huaux F(4), 
Jesús Cruz M(5), Moldovan H(6), Verpaele S(7), Jayapala M(8), Tunney M(9), 
Humblet-Baron S(10), Dirven H(11), Cecilie Nygaard U(11), Lindeman B(11), Duale 
N(11), Liston A(12), Meulengracht Flachs E(13), Kastaniegaard K(14), Ketzel 
M(15), Goetz J(16), Vanoirbeek J(1), Ghosh M(1), Hoet PHM(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Environment and Health, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Centre for Environmental Sciences, University of Hasselt, Hasselt, Belgium.
(4)Louvain Centre for Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, Université Catholique 
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(6)University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Science and Technology of Targu Mureş, 
Targu Mureş, Romania.
(7)Belgian Center for Occupational Hygiene, Zwijnaarde, Belgium.
(8)imec (Interuniversitair Microelectronica Centrum), Leuven, Belgium.
(9)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Department of Environmental Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 
Oslo, Norway.
(12)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signalling and Development, The Babraham Institute, 
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, CB22 3AT United Kingdom.
(13)Region Hovedstaden, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(14)Biogenity ApS, Aalborg, Denmark.
(15)Section of Atmospheric Modelling, Department of Environmental Science, 
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(16)accelopment AG, Zurich, Switzerland.

Immune-mediated, noncommunicable diseases-such as autoimmune and inflammatory 
diseases-are chronic disorders, in which the interaction between environmental 
exposures and the immune system plays an important role. The prevalence and 
societal costs of these diseases are rising in the European Union. The EXIMIOUS 
consortium-gathering experts in immunology, toxicology, occupational health, 
clinical medicine, exposure science, epidemiology, bioinformatics, and sensor 
development-will study eleven European study populations, covering the entire 
lifespan, including prenatal life. Innovative ways of characterizing and 
quantifying the exposome will be combined with high-dimensional 
immunophenotyping and -profiling platforms to map the immune effects (immunome) 
induced by the exposome. We will use two main approaches that "meet in the 
middle"-one starting from the exposome, the other starting from health effects. 
Novel bioinformatics tools, based on systems immunology and machine learning, 
will be used to integrate and analyze these large datasets to identify immune 
fingerprints that reflect a person's lifetime exposome or that are early 
predictors of disease. This will allow researchers, policymakers, and clinicians 
to grasp the impact of the exposome on the immune system at the level of 
individuals and populations.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf 
of The Environmental Epidemiology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000193
PMCID: PMC8835560
PMID: 35169671

Conflict of interest statement: S.V. is the legal representative of STEVOH BV. 
STEVOH BV has been appointed as Managing director of the non-profit organisation 
BeCOH. S.V. works for the Nickel Institute, a global association of primary 
nickel producers. S.V. also works as external industrial hygiene consultant for 
many companies and associations in the context of the NEPSI, European Network 
for Silica. The views expressed are entirely those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the Nickel Institute or NEPSI policy. All remaining authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest with regard to the content of 
this report.


142. J Cheminform. 2021 Apr 19;13(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00509-z.

Flame: an open source framework for model development, hosting, and usage in 
production environments.

Pastor M(1), Gómez-Tamayo JC(2), Sanz F(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Department of 
Experimental and Health Sciences, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute 
(IMIM), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. manuel.pastor@upf.edu.
(2)Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Department of 
Experimental and Health Sciences, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute 
(IMIM), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

This article describes Flame, an open source software for building predictive 
models and supporting their use in production environments. Flame is a web 
application with a web-based graphic interface, which can be used as a desktop 
application or installed in a server receiving requests from multiple users. 
Models can be built starting from any collection of biologically annotated 
chemical structures since the software supports structural normalization, 
molecular descriptor calculation, and machine learning model generation using 
predefined workflows. The model building workflow can be customized from the 
graphic interface, selecting the type of normalization, molecular descriptors, 
and machine learning algorithm to be used from a panel of state-of-the-art 
methods implemented natively. Moreover, Flame implements a mechanism allowing to 
extend its source code, adding unlimited model customization. Models generated 
with Flame can be easily exported, facilitating collaborative model development. 
All models are stored in a model repository supporting model versioning. Models 
are identified by unique model IDs and include detailed documentation formatted 
using widely accepted standards. The current version is the result of nearly 
3 years of development in collaboration with users from the pharmaceutical 
industry within the IMI eTRANSAFE project, which aims, among other objectives, 
to develop high-quality predictive models based on shared legacy data for 
assessing the safety of drug candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-021-00509-z
PMCID: PMC8054391
PMID: 33875019

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


143. Drug Metab Dispos. 2022 Jul 22:DMD-MR-2021-000739. doi: 10.1124/dmd.121.000739. 
Online ahead of print.

Drug metabolism: a half-century plus of progress, continued needs, and new 
opportunities.

Guengerich FP(1).

Author information:
(1)2200 Dept. Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, United States 
f.guengerich@vanderbilt.edu.

The systematic study of drug metabolism began in the 19th Century but most of 
what we know now has been learned in the last 50 years. Drug metabolism 
continues to play a critical role in pharmaceutical development and clinical 
practice, as well as contributing to toxicology, chemical carcinogenesis, 
endocrinology, and drug abuse. The importance of the field will continue, but 
its nature will continue to develop with changes in analytical chemistry, 
structural biology, and artificial intelligence. Challenges and opportunities 
include toxicology, defining roles of genetic variations, and application to 
clinical issues. Although the focus of this MiniReview is cytochrome P450, the 
same principles apply to other enzymes and transporters involved in drug 
metabolism. Significance Statement Progress in the field of drug metabolism over 
the past 50 years has helped make the pharmaceutical enterprise what it is 
today. Drug metabolism will continue to be important. Challenges and 
opportunities for the future are discussed.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.121.000739
PMID: 35868640


144. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2022 Aug 22:1-10. doi: 10.1080/01480545.2022.2113888. Online 
ahead of print.

In silico QSAR modeling to predict the safe use of antibiotics during pregnancy.

Kelleci Çelik F(1), Karaduman G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Vocational School of Health Services, Karamanoğlu Mehmetbey University, 
Karaman, Turkey.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, 
USA.

The use of medicines during pregnancy is a growing public health concern due to 
the risk of developmental toxicity. Healthcare providers heavily rely on the FDA 
pregnancy risk categories (A, B, C, D, and X). Antibiotics are among the most 
prescribed drugs during pregnancy and are often listed under category B or C. 
However, the risk-benefit assessment may be lacking due to challenges in the 
clinical toxicology studies on pregnant women, such as ethical concerns. The 
primary focus of this study is to generate a model that predicts the safe use of 
antibiotics during pregnancy by using in silico approaches. Thus, a QSAR model 
was created to assess the FDA pregnancy category (B or C) of antibiotics. The 
dataset consisted of 97 antibiotics obtained from the FDA. A total of 6420 
molecular descriptors were determined via multiple software and various machine 
learning algorithms were utilized. The performance of the models was measured 
using internal and external validation. The accuracy (ACC) values of the most 
successful model were 83.82% for the internal and 94.11% for the external 
validation. Sensitivity (SE), specificity (SP), MCC, and ROC values were 0.878, 
0.778, 0.68, and 0.892 for the internal validation and 0.9, 1, 0.887, and 0.936 
for the external validation, respectively. Kappa statistics also indicate that 
there was a substantial agreement for internal validation with 0.6765 and an 
almost perfect agreement for external validation with 0.8811. In conclusion, our 
model can be used as an initial step before pre-clinical and clinical studies to 
predict the safe use of antibiotics in pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1080/01480545.2022.2113888
PMID: 35993594


145. Biomolecules. 2019 Oct 7;9(10):577. doi: 10.3390/biom9100577.

A Computational Toxicology Approach to Screen the Hepatotoxic Ingredients in 
Traditional Chinese Medicines: Polygonum multiflorum Thunb as a Case Study.

He S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang X(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Lu S(11)(12)(13)(14)(15), Zhu 
T(16)(17)(18)(19)(20), Sun G(21)(22)(23)(24)(25), Sun X(26)(27)(28)(29)(30).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. wenyuxuan2530@139.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
wenyuxuan2530@139.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. wenyuxuan2530@139.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
wenyuxuan2530@139.com.
(5)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. wenyuxuan2530@139.com.
(6)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 13022517967@163.com.
(7)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
13022517967@163.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. 13022517967@163.com.
(9)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
13022517967@163.com.
(10)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. 13022517967@163.com.
(11)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. lushanluna@163.com.
(12)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
lushanluna@163.com.
(13)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. lushanluna@163.com.
(14)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
lushanluna@163.com.
(15)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. lushanluna@163.com.
(16)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. linlang0402@foxmail.com.
(17)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
linlang0402@foxmail.com.
(18)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. linlang0402@foxmail.com.
(19)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
linlang0402@foxmail.com.
(20)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. linlang0402@foxmail.com.
(21)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. gbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(22)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
gbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(23)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. gbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(24)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
gbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(25)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. gbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(26)Beijing Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Discovery of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (Natural Medicine) and Translational Medicine, Institute of Medicinal 
Plant Development, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. xbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(27)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resource Utilization of Chinese 
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100193, China. 
xbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(28)Key Laboratory of Efficacy Evaluation of Chinese Medicine against Glycolipid 
Metabolic Disorders, State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing 100193, China. xbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(29)Key Laboratory of new drug discovery based on Classic Chinese medicine 
prescription, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. 
xbsun@implad.ac.cn.
(30)Zhongguancun Open Laboratory of the Research and Development of Natural 
Medicine and Health Products, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, 
China. xbsun@implad.ac.cn.

In recent years, liver injury induced by Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCMs) 
has gained increasing attention worldwide. Assessing the hepatotoxicity of 
compounds in TCMs is essential and inevitable for both doctors and regulatory 
agencies. However, there has been no effective method to screen the hepatotoxic 
ingredients in TCMs available until now. In the present study, we initially 
built a large scale dataset of drug-induced liver injuries (DILIs). Then, 13 
types of molecular fingerprints/descriptors and eight machine learning 
algorithms were utilized to develop single classifiers for DILI, which resulted 
in 5416 single classifiers. Next, the NaiveBayes algorithm was adopted to 
integrate the best single classifier of each machine learning algorithm, by 
which we attempted to build a combined classifier. The accuracy, sensitivity, 
specificity, and area under the curve of the combined classifier were 72.798, 
0.732, 0.724, and 0.793, respectively. Compared to several prior studies, the 
combined classifier provided better performance both in cross validation and 
external validation. In our prior study, we developed a herb-hepatotoxic 
ingredient network and a herb-induced liver injury (HILI) dataset based on 
pre-clinical evidence published in the scientific literature. Herein, by 
combining that and the combined classifier developed in this work, we proposed 
the first instance of a computational toxicology to screen the hepatotoxic 
ingredients in TCMs. Then Polygonum multiflorum Thunb (PmT) was used as a case 
to investigate the reliability of the approach proposed. Consequently, a total 
of 25 ingredients in PmT were identified as hepatotoxicants. The results were 
highly consistent with records in the literature, indicating that our 
computational toxicology approach is reliable and effective for the screening of 
hepatotoxic ingredients in Pmt. The combined classifier developed in this work 
can be used to assess the hepatotoxic risk of both natural compounds and 
synthetic drugs. The computational toxicology approach presented in this work 
will assist with screening the hepatotoxic ingredients in TCMs, which will 
further lay the foundation for exploring the hepatotoxic mechanisms of TCMs. In 
addition, the method proposed in this work can be applied to research focused on 
other adverse effects of TCMs/synthetic drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9100577
PMCID: PMC6843577
PMID: 31591318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


146. Front Physiol. 2019 Aug 13;10:1044. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01044. eCollection 
2019.

Deep Learning-Based Structure-Activity Relationship Modeling for Multi-Category 
Toxicity Classification: A Case Study of 10K Tox21 Chemicals With 
High-Throughput Cell-Based Androgen Receptor Bioassay Data.

Idakwo G(1), Thangapandian S(2), Luttrell J 4th(1), Zhou Z(1), Zhang C(1), Gong 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing Sciences and Computer Engineering, The University of 
Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS, United States.
(2)Environmental Laboratory, U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center, 
Vicksburg, MS, United States.

Deep learning (DL) has attracted the attention of computational toxicologists as 
it offers a potentially greater power for in silico predictive toxicology than 
existing shallow learning algorithms. However, contradicting reports have been 
documented. To further explore the advantages of DL over shallow learning, we 
conducted this case study using two cell-based androgen receptor (AR) activity 
datasets with 10K chemicals generated from the Tox21 program. A nested 
double-loop cross-validation approach was adopted along with a stratified 
sampling strategy for partitioning chemicals of multiple AR activity classes 
(i.e., agonist, antagonist, inactive, and inconclusive) at the same distribution 
rates amongst the training, validation and test subsets. Deep neural networks 
(DNN) and random forest (RF), representing deep and shallow learning algorithms, 
respectively, were chosen to carry out structure-activity relationship-based 
chemical toxicity prediction. Results suggest that DNN significantly 
outperformed RF (p < 0.001, ANOVA) by 22-27% for four metrics (precision, 
recall, F-measure, and AUPRC) and by 11% for another (AUROC). Further in-depth 
analyses of chemical scaffolding shed insights on structural alerts for AR 
agonists/antagonists and inactive/inconclusive compounds, which may aid in 
future drug discovery and improvement of toxicity prediction modeling.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01044
PMCID: PMC6700714
PMID: 31456700


147. Neural Netw. 2005 Oct;18(8):1093-110. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2005.07.009. Epub 
2005 Sep 12.

Graph kernels for chemical informatics.

Ralaivola L(1), Swamidass SJ, Saigo H, Baldi P.

Author information:
(1)School of Information and Computer Sciences, University of California, 
Irvine, CA 92697-3425, USA.

Increased availability of large repositories of chemical compounds is creating 
new challenges and opportunities for the application of machine learning methods 
to problems in computational chemistry and chemical informatics. Because 
chemical compounds are often represented by the graph of their covalent bonds, 
machine learning methods in this domain must be capable of processing graphical 
structures with variable size. Here, we first briefly review the literature on 
graph kernels and then introduce three new kernels (Tanimoto, MinMax, Hybrid) 
based on the idea of molecular fingerprints and counting labeled paths of depth 
up to d using depth-first search from each possible vertex. The kernels are 
applied to three classification problems to predict mutagenicity, toxicity, and 
anti-cancer activity on three publicly available data sets. The kernels achieve 
performances at least comparable, and most often superior, to those previously 
reported in the literature reaching accuracies of 91.5% on the Mutag dataset, 
65-67% on the PTC (Predictive Toxicology Challenge) dataset, and 72% on the NCI 
(National Cancer Institute) dataset. Properties and tradeoffs of these kernels, 
as well as other proposed kernels that leverage 1D or 3D representations of 
molecules, are briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2005.07.009
PMID: 16157471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Jun 1;269(2):195-204. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2013.03.010. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

In silico modeling to predict drug-induced phospholipidosis.

Choi SS(1), Kim JS, Valerio LG Jr, Sadrieh N.

Author information:
(1)Science and Research Staff, Office of Pharmaceutical Science, Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire 
Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002, USA.

Drug-induced phospholipidosis (DIPL) is a preclinical finding during 
pharmaceutical drug development that has implications on the course of drug 
development and regulatory safety review. A principal characteristic of drugs 
inducing DIPL is known to be a cationic amphiphilic structure. This provides 
evidence for a structure-based explanation and opportunity to analyze properties 
and structures of drugs with the histopathologic findings for DIPL. In previous 
work from the FDA, in silico quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) 
modeling using machine learning approaches has shown promise with a large 
dataset of drugs but included unconfirmed data as well. In this study, we report 
the construction and validation of a battery of complementary in silico QSAR 
models using the FDA's updated database on phospholipidosis, new algorithms and 
predictive technologies, and in particular, we address high performance with a 
high-confidence dataset. The results of our modeling for DIPL include rigorous 
external validation tests showing 80-81% concordance. Furthermore, the 
predictive performance characteristics include models with high sensitivity and 
specificity, in most cases above ≥80% leading to desired high negative and 
positive predictivity. These models are intended to be utilized for regulatory 
toxicology applied science needs in screening new drugs for DIPL.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.03.010
PMID: 23541745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Cheminform. 2011 May 16;3:18. doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-3-18.

AMBIT RESTful web services: an implementation of the OpenTox application 
programming interface.

Jeliazkova N(1), Jeliazkov V.

Author information:
(1)Ideaconsult Ltd,, Angel Kanchev Str 4, Sofia 1000, Bulgaria. 
jeliazkova.nina@gmail.com.

The AMBIT web services package is one of the several existing independent 
implementations of the OpenTox Application Programming Interface and is built 
according to the principles of the Representational State Transfer (REST) 
architecture. The Open Source Predictive Toxicology Framework, developed by the 
partners in the EC FP7 OpenTox project, aims at providing a unified access to 
toxicity data and predictive models, as well as validation procedures. This is 
achieved by i) an information model, based on a common OWL-DL ontology ii) links 
to related ontologies; iii) data and algorithms, available through a 
standardized REST web services interface, where every compound, data set or 
predictive method has a unique web address, used to retrieve its Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) representation, or initiate the associated 
calculations.The AMBIT web services package has been developed as an extension 
of AMBIT modules, adding the ability to create (Quantitative) Structure-Activity 
Relationship (QSAR) models and providing an OpenTox API compliant interface. The 
representation of data and processing resources in W3C Resource Description 
Framework facilitates integrating the resources as Linked Data. By uploading 
datasets with chemical structures and arbitrary set of properties, they become 
automatically available online in several formats. The services provide unified 
interfaces to several descriptor calculation, machine learning and similarity 
searching algorithms, as well as to applicability domain and toxicity prediction 
models. All Toxtree modules for predicting the toxicological hazard of chemical 
compounds are also integrated within this package. The complexity and diversity 
of the processing is reduced to the simple paradigm "read data from a web 
address, perform processing, write to a web address". The online service allows 
to easily run predictions, without installing any software, as well to share 
online datasets and models. The downloadable web application allows researchers 
to setup an arbitrary number of service instances for specific purposes and at 
suitable locations. These services could be used as a distributed framework for 
processing of resource-intensive tasks and data sharing or in a fully 
independent way, according to the specific needs. The advantage of exposing the 
functionality via the OpenTox API is seamless interoperability, not only within 
a single web application, but also in a network of distributed services. Last, 
but not least, the services provide a basis for building web mashups, end user 
applications with friendly GUIs, as well as embedding the functionalities in 
existing workflow systems.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-2946-3-18
PMCID: PMC3120779
PMID: 21575202


150. J Chem Inf Model. 2020 Jan 27;60(1):63-76. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00718. Epub 
2020 Jan 10.

Systematic Modeling of log D(7.4) Based on Ensemble Machine Learning, Group 
Contribution, and Matched Molecular Pair Analysis.

Fu L(1), Liu L(1), Yang ZJ(1), Li P(2), Ding JJ(2), Yun YH(3), Lu AP(4), Hou 
TJ(5), Cao DS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Xiangya School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Central South University , 
Changsha 410013 , Hunan , P. R. China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , Beijing 102205 , P. R. China.
(3)College of Food Science and Engineering , Hainan University , Haikou 570228 , 
P. R. China.
(4)Institute for Advancing Translational Medicine in Bone & Joint Diseases, 
School of Chinese Medicine , Hong Kong Baptist University , Hong Kong SAR 999077 
, P. R. China.
(5)Hangzhou Institute of Innovative Medicine, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310058 , Zhejiang , P. R. China.

Lipophilicity, as evaluated by the n-octanol/buffer solution distribution 
coefficient at pH = 7.4 (log D7.4), is a major determinant of various 
absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination, and toxicology (ADMET) 
parameters of drug candidates. In this study, we developed several quantitative 
structure-property relationship (QSPR) models to predict log D7.4 based on a 
large and structurally diverse data set. Eight popular machine learning 
algorithms were employed to build the prediction models with 43 molecular 
descriptors selected by a wrapper feature selection method. The results 
demonstrated that XGBoost yielded better prediction performance than any other 
single model (RT2 = 0.906 and RMSET = 0.395). Moreover, the consensus model from 
the top three models could continue to improve the prediction performance (RT2 = 
0.922 and RMSET = 0.359). The robustness, reliability, and generalization 
ability of the models were strictly evaluated by the Y-randomization test and 
applicability domain analysis. Moreover, the group contribution model based on 
110 atom types and the local models for different ionization states were also 
established and compared to the global models. The results demonstrated that the 
descriptor-based consensus model is superior to the group contribution method, 
and the local models have no advantage over the global models. Finally, matched 
molecular pair (MMP) analysis and descriptor importance analysis were performed 
to extract transformation rules and give some explanations related to log D7.4. 
In conclusion, we believe that the consensus model developed in this study can 
be used as a reliable and promising tool to evaluate log D7.4 in drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00718
PMID: 31869226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Patterns (N Y). 2022 Aug 24;3(9):100565. doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2022.100565. 
eCollection 2022 Sep 9.

Knowledge-guided deep learning models of drug toxicity improve interpretation.

Hao Y(1), Romano JD(2)(3), Moore JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Genomics and Computational Biology (GCB) Graduate Program, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center of Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Biomedicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

In drug development, a major reason for attrition is the lack of understanding 
of cellular mechanisms governing drug toxicity. The black-box nature of 
conventional classification models has limited their utility in identifying 
toxicity pathways. Here we developed DTox (deep learning for toxicology), an 
interpretation framework for knowledge-guided neural networks, which can predict 
compound response to toxicity assays and infer toxicity pathways of individual 
compounds. We demonstrate that DTox can achieve the same level of predictive 
performance as conventional models with a significant improvement in 
interpretability. Using DTox, we were able to rediscover mechanisms of 
transcription activation by three nuclear receptors, recapitulate cellular 
activities induced by aromatase inhibitors and pregnane X receptor (PXR) 
agonists, and differentiate distinctive mechanisms leading to HepG2 
cytotoxicity. Virtual screening by DTox revealed that compounds with predicted 
cytotoxicity are at higher risk for clinical hepatic phenotypes. In summary, 
DTox provides a framework for deciphering cellular mechanisms of toxicity in 
silico.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.patter.2022.100565
PMCID: PMC9481960
PMID: 36124309

Conflict of interest statement: J.H.M. is a member of the advisory board of 
Patterns.


152. J Cheminform. 2016 Sep 22;8:48. doi: 10.1186/s13321-016-0164-0. eCollection 
2016.

An ensemble model of QSAR tools for regulatory risk assessment.

Pradeep P(1), Povinelli RJ(2), White S(3), Merrill SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Computational Toxicology (ORISE Fellow), US EPA, Research 
Triangle Park, NC USA.
(2)Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Marquette University, 
Milwaukee, WI USA.
(3)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC USA.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, Marquette 
University, Milwaukee, WI USA.

Quantitative structure activity relationships (QSARs) are theoretical models 
that relate a quantitative measure of chemical structure to a physical property 
or a biological effect. QSAR predictions can be used for chemical risk 
assessment for protection of human and environmental health, which makes them 
interesting to regulators, especially in the absence of experimental data. For 
compatibility with regulatory use, QSAR models should be transparent, 
reproducible and optimized to minimize the number of false negatives. In silico 
QSAR tools are gaining wide acceptance as a faster alternative to otherwise 
time-consuming clinical and animal testing methods. However, different QSAR 
tools often make conflicting predictions for a given chemical and may also vary 
in their predictive performance across different chemical datasets. In a 
regulatory context, conflicting predictions raise interpretation, validation and 
adequacy concerns. To address these concerns, ensemble learning techniques in 
the machine learning paradigm can be used to integrate predictions from multiple 
tools. By leveraging various underlying QSAR algorithms and training datasets, 
the resulting consensus prediction should yield better overall predictive 
ability. We present a novel ensemble QSAR model using Bayesian classification. 
The model allows for varying a cut-off parameter that allows for a selection in 
the desirable trade-off between model sensitivity and specificity. The 
predictive performance of the ensemble model is compared with four in silico 
tools (Toxtree, Lazar, OECD Toolbox, and Danish QSAR) to predict carcinogenicity 
for a dataset of air toxins (332 chemicals) and a subset of the gold 
carcinogenic potency database (480 chemicals). Leave-one-out cross validation 
results show that the ensemble model achieves the best trade-off between 
sensitivity and specificity (accuracy: 83.8 % and 80.4 %, and balanced accuracy: 
80.6 % and 80.8 %) and highest inter-rater agreement [kappa (κ): 0.63 and 0.62] 
for both the datasets. The ROC curves demonstrate the utility of the cut-off 
feature in the predictive ability of the ensemble model. This feature provides 
an additional control to the regulators in grading a chemical based on the 
severity of the toxic endpoint under study.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-016-0164-0
PMCID: PMC5034616
PMID: 28316646


153. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 May 18;55(10):6857-6866. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.0c07040. 
Epub 2021 Apr 29.

Developing QSAR Models with Defined Applicability Domains on PPARγ Binding 
Affinity Using Large Data Sets and Machine Learning Algorithms.

Wang Z(1), Chen J(1), Hong H(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (Ministry 
of Education), Dalian Key Laboratory on Chemicals Risk Control and Pollution 
Prevention Technology, School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian 
University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China.
(2)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, United States.

Chemicals may cause adverse effects on human health through binding to 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ). Hence, binding affinity is 
useful for evaluating chemicals with potential endocrine-disrupting effects. 
Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) regression models with 
defined applicability domains (ADs) are important to enable efficient screening 
of chemicals with PPARγ binding activity. However, lack of large data sets 
hindered the development of QSAR models. In this study, based on PPARγ binding 
affinity data sets curated from various sources, 30 QSAR models were developed 
using molecular fingerprints, two-dimensional descriptors, and five machine 
learning algorithms. Structure-activity landscapes (SALs) of the training 
compounds were described by network-like similarity graphs (NSGs). Based on the 
NSGs, local discontinuity scores were calculated and found to be positively 
correlated with the cross-validation absolute prediction errors of the models 
using the different training sets, descriptors, and algorithms. Moreover, 
innovative ADs were defined based on pairwise similarities between compounds and 
were found to outperform some conventional ADs. The curated data sets and 
developed regression models could be useful for evaluating PPARγ-involved 
adverse effects of chemicals. The SAL analysis and the innovative ADs could 
facilitate understanding of prediction results from QSAR models.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.0c07040
PMID: 33914508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2020 Mar;39(3):526-537. doi: 10.1002/etc.4646. Epub 2020 
Feb 10.

A Self-Organizing Map of the Fathead Minnow Liver Transcriptome to Identify 
Consistent Toxicogenomic Patterns across Chemical Fingerprints.

Krämer S(1)(2), Busch W(1), Schüttler A(1).

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz-Center for Environmental Research - UFZ GmbH, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science and Interdisciplinary 
Center for Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Lack of consistent findings in different experimental settings remains a major 
challenge in toxicogenomics. The present study investigated whether consistency 
between findings of different microarray experiments can be improved when the 
analysis is based on a common reference frame ("toxicogenomic universe"), which 
can be generated using the machine learning algorithm of the self-organizing map 
(SOM). This algorithm arranges and clusters genes on a 2-dimensional grid 
according to their similarity in expression across all considered data. In the 
present study, 19 data sets, comprising of 54 different adult fathead minnow 
liver exposure experiments, were retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus and used 
to train a SOM. The resulting toxicogenomic universe aggregates 58 872 probes to 
2500 nodes and was used to project, visualize, and compare the fingerprints of 
these 54 different experiments. For example, we could identify a common pattern, 
with 14% of significantly regulated nodes in common, in the data sets of an 
interlaboratory study of ethinylestradiol exposures. Consistency could be 
improved compared with the 5% total overlap in regulated genes reported before. 
Furthermore, we could determine a specific and consistent estrogen-related 
pattern of differentially expressed nodes and clusters in the toxicogenomic 
universe by applying additional clustering steps and comparing all obtained 
fingerprints. Our study shows that the SOM-based approach is useful for 
generating comparable toxicogenomic fingerprints and improving consistency 
between results of different experiments. Environ Toxicol Chem 2020;39:526-537. 
© 2019 The Authors. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of SETAC.

© 2019 The Authors. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of SETAC.

DOI: 10.1002/etc.4646
PMID: 31820487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Sep 30. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13800. Online ahead 
of print.

Classification of acute poisoning exposures with machine learning models derived 
from the National Poison Data System.

Mehrpour O(1), Hoyte C(2), Delva-Clark H(3), Al Masud A(4), Biswas A(5), 
Schimmel J(6), Nakhaee S(7), Goss F(2).

Author information:
(1)Data Science Institute, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Rocky Mountain Poison & Drug Safety, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(3)CPC Clinical Research, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)Data Scientist, Hiperdyne Corporation, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Colorado 
Denver, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Medical Toxicology, Mount Sinai 
Hospital Icahn School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Medical Toxicology and Drug Abuse Research Center (MTDRC), Birjand University 
of Medical Sciences (BUMS), Birjand, Iran.

The primary aim of this pilot study was to develop a machine learning algorithm 
to predict and distinguish eight poisoning agents based on clinical symptoms. 
Data were used from the National Poison Data System from 2014 to 2018, for 
patients 0-89 years old with single-agent exposure to eight drugs or drug 
classes (acetaminophen, aspirin, benzodiazepines, bupropion, calcium channel 
blockers, diphenhydramine, lithium and sulfonylureas). Four classifier 
prediction models were applied to the data: logistic regression, LightGBM, 
XGBoost, and CatBoost. There were 201 031 cases used to develop and test the 
algorithms. Among the four models, accuracy ranged 77%-80%, with precision and 
F1 scores of 76%-80% and recall of 77%-78%. Overall specificity was 92% for all 
models. Accuracy was highest for identifying sulfonylureas, acetaminophen, 
benzodiazepines and diphenhydramine poisoning. F1 scores were highest for 
correctly classifying sulfonylureas, acetaminophen and benzodiazepine 
poisonings. Recall was highest for sulfonylureas, acetaminophen, and 
benzodiazepines, and lowest for bupropion. Specificity was >99% for models of 
sulfonylureas, calcium channel blockers, lithium and aspirin. For single-agent 
poisoning cases among the eight possible exposures, machine learning models 
based on clinical signs and symptoms moderately predicted the causal agent. 
CatBoost and LightGBM classifier models had the highest performance of those 
tested.

© 2022 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society). Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13800
PMID: 36181236


156. Chemosphere. 2020 Aug;253:126768. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126768. Epub 
2020 Apr 12.

Discriminant models on mitochondrial toxicity improved by consensus modeling and 
resolving imbalance in training.

Tang W(1), Chen J(2), Hong H(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, 116024, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, 116024, China. Electronic address: jwchen@dlut.edu.cn.
(3)National Center for Toxicological Research, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, 3900 NCTR Rd, Jefferson, AR, 72079, USA.

Humans and animals may be exposed to tens of thousands of natural and synthetic 
chemicals during their lifespan. It is difficult to assess risk for all the 
chemicals with experimental toxicity tests. An alternative approach is to use 
computational toxicology methods such as quantitative structure-activity 
relationship (QSAR) modeling. Mitochondrial toxicity is involved in many 
diseases such as cancer, neurodegeneration, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular 
diseases and autoimmune diseases. Thus, it is important to rapidly and 
efficiently identify chemicals with mitochondrial toxicity. In this study, five 
machine learning algorithms and twelve types of molecular fingerprints were 
employed to generate QSAR discriminant models for mitochondrial toxicity. A 
threshold moving method was adopted to resolve the imbalance issue in the 
training data. Consensus of the models by an averaging probability strategy 
improved prediction performance. The best model has correct classification rates 
of 81.8% and 88.3% in ten-fold cross validation and external validation, 
respectively. Substructures such as phenol, carboxylic acid, nitro and 
arylchloride were found informative through analysis of information gain and 
frequency of substructures. The results demonstrate that resolving imbalance in 
training and building consensus models can improve classification rates for 
mitochondrial toxicity prediction.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126768
PMID: 32464767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


157. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017 May 15;30(5):1209-1218. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.7b00037. Epub 2017 Apr 26.

In Silico Prediction of Chemicals Binding to Aromatase with Machine Learning 
Methods.

Du H(1), Cai Y(1), Yang H(1), Zhang H(1), Xue Y(1), Liu G(1), Tang Y(1), Li 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology , Shanghai 200237, China.

Environmental chemicals may affect endocrine systems through multiple 
mechanisms, one of which is via effects on aromatase (also known as CYP19A1), an 
enzyme critical for maintaining the normal balance of estrogens and androgens in 
the body. Therefore, rapid and efficient identification of aromatase-related 
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) is important for toxicology and 
environment risk assessment. In this study, on the basis of the Tox21 10K 
compound library, in silico classification models for predicting aromatase 
binders/nonbinders were constructed by machine learning methods. To improve the 
prediction ability of the models, a combined classifier (CC) strategy that 
combines different independent machine learning methods was adopted. 
Performances of the models were measured by test and external validation sets 
containing 1336 and 216 chemicals, respectively. The best model was obtained 
with the MACCS (Molecular Access System) fingerprint and CC method, which 
exhibited an accuracy of 0.84 for the test set and 0.91 for the external 
validation set. Additionally, several representative substructures for 
characterizing aromatase binders, such as ketone, lactone, and 
nitrogen-containing derivatives, were identified using information gain and 
substructure frequency analysis. Our study provided a systematic assessment of 
chemicals binding to aromatase. The built models can be helpful to rapidly 
identify potential EDCs targeting aromatase.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.7b00037
PMID: 28414904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Molecules. 2021 Mar 15;26(6):1617. doi: 10.3390/molecules26061617.

Predictive Capability of QSAR Models Based on the CompTox Zebrafish Embryo 
Assays: An Imbalanced Classification Problem.

Lovrić M(1)(2), Malev O(2)(3), Klobučar G(3), Kern R(1)(4), Liu JJ(5), Lučić 
B(2).

Author information:
(1)Know-Center, Inffeldgasse 13, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(2)Ruđer Bošković Institute, P.O. Box 180, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Rooseveltov 
Trg 6, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Institute of Interactive Systems and Data Science, TU Graz, Inffeldgasse 16c, 
8010 Graz, Austria.
(5)Department of Chemical Engineering, Pukyong National University, Busan 
608-739, Korea.

The CompTox Chemistry Dashboard (ToxCast) contains one of the largest public 
databases on Zebrafish (Danio rerio) developmental toxicity. The data consists 
of 19 toxicological endpoints on unique 1018 compounds measured in relatively 
low concentration ranges. The endpoints are related to developmental effects 
occurring in dechorionated zebrafish embryos for 120 hours post fertilization 
and monitored via gross malformations and mortality. We report the predictive 
capability of 209 quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models 
developed by machine learning methods using penalization techniques and diverse 
model quality metrics to cope with the imbalanced endpoints. All these QSAR 
models were generated to test how the imbalanced classification (toxic or 
non-toxic) endpoints could be predicted regardless which of three algorithms is 
used: logistic regression, multi-layer perceptron, or random forests. 
Additionally, QSAR toxicity models are developed starting from sets of classical 
molecular descriptors, structural fingerprints and their combinations. Only 8 
out of 209 models passed the 0.20 Matthew's correlation coefficient value 
defined a priori as a threshold for acceptable model quality on the test sets. 
The best models were obtained for endpoints mortality (MORT), ActivityScore and 
JAW (deformation). The low predictability of the QSAR model developed from the 
zebrafish embryotoxicity data in the database is mainly due to a higher 
sensitivity of 19 measurements of endpoints carried out on dechorionated embryos 
at low concentrations.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26061617
PMCID: PMC7998177
PMID: 33803931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


159. Toxicol Res. 2022 Mar 3;38(3):393-407. doi: 10.1007/s43188-022-00124-6. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Semi-automated approach for generation of biological networks on drug-induced 
cholestasis, steatosis, hepatitis, and cirrhosis.

Shin HK(1)(2), Florean O(3), Hardy B(3), Doktorova T(3), Kang MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Toxicoinformatics Group, Department of Predictive Toxicology, Korea Institute 
of Toxicology, Daejeon, 34114 Republic of Korea.
(2)Human and Environmental Toxicology, University of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, 34113 Republic of Korea.
(3)Edelweiss Connect GmbH, Hochbergerstrasse 60C, 4057 Basel, Switzerland.

Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is one of the leading reasons for 
discontinuation of a new drug development project. Diverse machine learning or 
deep learning models have been developed to predict DILI. However, these models 
have not provided an adequate understanding of the mechanisms leading to DILI. 
The development of safer drugs requires novel computational approaches that 
enable the prompt understanding of the mechanism of DILI. In this study, the 
mechanisms leading to the development of cholestasis, steatosis, hepatitis, and 
cirrhosis were explored using a semi-automated approach for data gathering and 
associations. Diverse data from ToxCast, Comparative Toxicogenomic Database 
(CTD), Reactome, and Open TG-GATEs on reference molecules leading to the 
development of the respective diseases were extracted. The data were used to 
create biological networks of the four diseases. As expected, the four networks 
had several common pathways, and a joint DILI network was assembled. Such 
biological networks could be used in drug discovery to identify possible 
molecules of concern as they provide a better understanding of the 
disease-specific key events. The events can be target-tested to provide 
indications for potential DILI effects.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s43188-022-00124-6.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s43188-022-00124-6
PMCID: PMC9247124
PMID: 35865277

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.


160. J Appl Toxicol. 2020 Nov;40(11):1566-1587. doi: 10.1002/jat.4020. Epub 2020 Jul 
13.

In vitro and in silico genetic toxicity screening of flavor compounds and other 
ingredients in tobacco products with emphasis on ENDS.

Hung PH(1), Savidge M(1), De M(1), Kang JC(1)(2), Healy SM(1), Valerio LG Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nonclinical Science, Office of Science, Center for Tobacco 
Products, United States Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, 
USA.
(2)US Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, Rockville, MD, USA.

Electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) are regulated tobacco products and 
often contain flavor compounds. Given the concern of increased use and the 
appeal of ENDS by young people, evaluating the potential of flavors to induce 
DNA damage is important for health hazard identification. In this study, 
alternative methods were used as prioritization tools to study the genotoxic 
mode of action (MoA) of 150 flavor compounds. In particular, clastogen-sensitive 
(γH2AX and p53) and aneugen-sensitive (p-H3 and polyploidy) biomarkers of DNA 
damage in human TK6 cells were aggregated through a supervised three-pronged 
ensemble machine learning prediction model to prioritize chemicals based on 
genotoxicity. In addition, in silico quantitative structure-activity 
relationship (QSAR) models were used to predict genotoxicity and carcinogenic 
potential. The in vitro assay identified 25 flavors as positive for 
genotoxicity: 15 clastogenic, eight aneugenic and two with a mixed MoA 
(clastogenic and aneugenic). Twenty-three of these 25 flavors predicted to 
induce DNA damage in vitro are documented in public literature to be in e-liquid 
or in the aerosols produced by ENDS products with youth-appealing flavors and 
names. QSAR models predicted 46 (31%) of 150 compounds having at least one 
positive call for mutagenicity, clastogenicity or rodent carcinogenicity, 49 
(33%) compounds were predicted negative for all three endpoints, and remaining 
compounds had no prediction call. The parallel use of these predictive 
technologies to elucidate MoAs for potential genetic damage, hold utility as a 
screening strategy. This study is the first high-content and high-throughput 
genotoxicity screening study with an emphasis on flavors in ENDS products.

Published 2020. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jat.4020
PMID: 32662109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Appl Toxicol. 2021 Oct;41(10):1518-1526. doi: 10.1002/jat.4141. Epub 2021 Jan 
20.

In silico prediction of mitochondrial toxicity of chemicals using machine 
learning methods.

Zhao P(1), Peng Y(1), Xu X(1), Wang Z(1), Wu Z(1), Li W(1), Tang Y(1), Liu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.

Mitochondria are important organelles in human cells, providing more than 95% of 
the energy. However, some drugs and environmental chemicals could induce 
mitochondrial dysfunction, which might cause complex diseases and even worsen 
the condition of patients with mitochondrial damage. Some drugs have been 
withdrawn from the market due to their severe mitochondrial toxicity, such as 
troglitazone. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop models that could 
accurately predict the mitochondrial toxicity of chemicals. In this paper, 
suitable data were obtained from literature and databases first. Then nine types 
of fingerprints were used to characterize these compounds. Finally, different 
algorithms were used to build models. Meanwhile, the applicability domain of the 
prediction models was defined. We have also explored the structural alerts of 
mitochondrial toxicity, which would be helpful for medicinal chemists to better 
predict mitochondrial toxicity and further optimize lead compounds.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jat.4141
PMID: 33469990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Bioinformatics. 2021 Oct 30;38(4):1173-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab750. 
Online ahead of print.

AOP-helpFinder webserver: a tool for comprehensive analysis of the literature to 
support adverse outcome pathways development.

Jornod F(1), Jaylet T(1), Blaha L(2), Sarigiannis D(3), Tamisier L(4), Audouze 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, T3S, Inserm UMR-S1124, 45 rue des Saints Pères, Paris, 
F-75006, France.
(2)RECETOX, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, Brno, CZ62500, 
Czech Republic.
(3)HERACLES Research Center on the Exposome and Health, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Center for Interdiciplinary Research and Innovation, Thessaloniki, 
57001, Greece.
(4)Université de Paris, SPPIN CNRS UMR 8003, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, Paris, 
F-75006, France.

MOTIVATION: Adverse Outcome Pathways (AOPs) are a conceptual framework developed 
to support the use of alternative toxicology approaches in the risk assessment. 
AOPs are structured linear organizations of existing knowledge illustrating 
causal pathways from the initial molecular perturbation triggered by various 
stressors, through key events (KEs) at different levels of biology, to the 
ultimate health or ecotoxicological adverse outcome.
RESULTS: Artificial intelligence can be used to systematically explore available 
toxicological data that can be parsed in the scientific literature. Recently a 
tool called AOP-helpFinder was developed to identify associations between 
stressors and KEs supporting thus documentation of AOPs. To facilitate the 
utilization of this advanced bioinformatics tool by the scientific and the 
regulatory community, a webserver was created. The proposed AOP-helpFinder 
webserver uses better performing version of the tool which reduces the need for 
manual curation of the obtained results. As an example, the server was 
successfully applied to explore relationships of a set of endocrine disruptors 
with metabolic-related events. The AOP-helpFinder webserver assists in a rapid 
evaluation of existing knowledge stored in the PubMed database, a global 
resource of scientific information, to build AOPs and Adverse Outcome Networks 
(AONs) supporting the chemical risk assessment.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: AOP-helpFinder is available at 
http://aop-helpfinder.u-paris-sciences.fr/index.php.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab750
PMCID: PMC8796376
PMID: 34718414


163. Toxicol Sci. 2021 Sep 28;183(2):269-284. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab089.

Comparing the Predictivity of Human Placental Gene, microRNA, and CpG 
Methylation Signatures in Relation to Perinatal Outcomes.

Clark J(1)(2), Avula V(1)(2), Ring C(3), Eaves LA(1)(2), Howard T(2), Santos 
HP(2)(4), Smeester L(1)(2), Bangma JT(1), O'Shea TM(5), Fry RC(1)(2)(6), Rager 
JE(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
(2)The Institute for Environmental Health Solutions, Gillings School of Global 
Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina 27599, USA.
(3)ToxStrategies, Inc, Austin, Texas, USA.
(4)Biobehavioral Laboratory, School of Nursing, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Division of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Curriculum in Toxicology and Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Molecular signatures are being increasingly integrated into predictive biology 
applications. However, there are limited studies comparing the overall 
predictivity of transcriptomic versus epigenomic signatures in relation to 
perinatal outcomes. This study set out to evaluate mRNA and microRNA (miRNA) 
expression and cytosine-guanine dinucleotide (CpG) methylation signatures in 
human placental tissues and relate these to perinatal outcomes known to 
influence maternal/fetal health; namely, birth weight, placenta weight, 
placental damage, and placental inflammation. The following hypotheses were 
tested: (1) different molecular signatures will demonstrate varying levels of 
predictivity towards perinatal outcomes, and (2) these signatures will show 
disruptions from an example exposure (ie, cadmium) known to elicit perinatal 
toxicity. Multi-omic placental profiles from 390 infants in the Extremely Low 
Gestational Age Newborns cohort were used to develop molecular signatures that 
predict each perinatal outcome. Epigenomic signatures (ie, miRNA and CpG 
methylation) consistently demonstrated the highest levels of predictivity, with 
model performance metrics including R2 (predicted vs observed) values of 
0.36-0.57 for continuous outcomes and balanced accuracy values of 0.49-0.77 for 
categorical outcomes. Top-ranking predictors included miRNAs involved in injury 
and inflammation. To demonstrate the utility of these predictive signatures in 
screening of potentially harmful exogenous insults, top-ranking miRNA predictors 
were analyzed in a separate pregnancy cohort and related to cadmium. Key 
predictive miRNAs demonstrated altered expression in association with cadmium 
exposure, including miR-210, known to impact placental cell growth, blood vessel 
development, and fetal weight. These findings inform future predictive biology 
applications, where additional benefit will be gained by including epigenetic 
markers.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology.All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab089
PMCID: PMC8478332
PMID: 34255065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Anal Chem. 2022 Aug 2;94(30):10617-10625. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c00611. 
Epub 2022 Jul 22.

E.P.A.S.S: Electroanalytical Pillbox Assessment Sensor System, A Case Study 
Using Metformin Hydrochloride.

Paul A(1), Dhamu VN(1), Muthukumar S(2), Prasad S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, 
Texas 75080, United States.
(2)EnLiSense LLC, 1813 Audubon Pondway, Allen, Texas 75013, United States.

Adulteration of medications is an emerging and significant threat to human 
health and well-being, even though adulterants are still often not considered 
seriously in clinical or forensic toxicology. Screening of drug adulterations is 
a major challenge and concern for regulatory authorities worldwide. Metformin 
hydrochloride, an important drug to treat diabetes, is found to be adulterated 
worldwide and a major reason to worry about the health and safety procedure. We 
have demonstrated a first-of-a-kind electrochemical biomedical device utilizing 
exfoliated graphene oxide (GO)─Nafion-modified customized gold screen-printed 
electrodes (spiral electrochemical notification-coupled electrode, SENCE), 
driven by electrochemical adsorptive stripping voltammetry, to identify the 
trace level adulteration in metformin. The GO-Nafion-SPE interface has been 
characterized by powder X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, 
scanning electron microscopy, energy-dispersive X-ray analysis, and Fourier 
transform infrared. Custom-made screen-printed SENCEs have been functionalized 
with GO nanoparticles (transducer) to obtain a fingerprint signal response of 
metformin using differential pulse voltammetry. A linear calibrated dose 
response has been obtained with n = 3 repetitions with a low limit of detection 
of 10 ppm for metformin. We have used the sensing response as a function of 
adulteration, and it is extensively supported by rigorous statistical analysis 
along with the help of the machine learning tool. This is a first-of-its-kind 
IoT-enabled electrochemical sensor and analysis platform that can detect drug 
adulteration as a low, medium, and high output.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c00611
PMID: 35867902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Arch Toxicol. 2020 Aug;94(8):2749-2767. doi: 10.1007/s00204-020-02778-3. Epub 
2020 Jun 12.

Predicting direct hepatocyte toxicity in humans by combining high-throughput 
imaging of HepaRG cells and machine learning-based phenotypic profiling.

Hussain F(1), Basu S(2), Heng JJH(1), Loo LH(3)(4), Zink D(5).

Author information:
(1)NanoBio Lab and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (IBN), 31 
Biopolis Way, The Nanos, Singapore, 138669, Singapore.
(2)Bioinformatics Institute, 30 Biopolis Street, #07-01 Matrix, Singapore, 
138671, Singapore.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute, 30 Biopolis Street, #07-01 Matrix, Singapore, 
138671, Singapore. loolh@bii.a-star.edu.sg.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, 16 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117600, Singapore. 
loolh@bii.a-star.edu.sg.
(5)NanoBio Lab and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (IBN), 31 
Biopolis Way, The Nanos, Singapore, 138669, Singapore. dzink@nbl.a-star.edu.sg.

Accurate prediction of drug- and chemical-induced hepatotoxicity remains to be a 
problem for pharmaceutical companies as well as other industries and regulators. 
The goal of the current study was to develop an in vitro/in silico method for 
the rapid and accurate prediction of drug- and chemical-induced hepatocyte 
injury in humans. HepaRG cells were employed for high-throughput imaging in 
combination with phenotypic profiling. A reference set of 69 drugs and chemicals 
was screened at a range of 7 concentrations, and the cellular response values 
were used for training a supervised classifier and for determining assay 
performance by using tenfold cross-validation. The results showed that the best 
performing phenotypic features were related to nuclear translocation of 
RELA (RELA proto-oncogene, NF-kB subunit; also known as NF-kappa B p65), DNA 
organization, and the F-actin cytoskeleton. Using a subset of 30 phenotypic 
features, direct hepatocyte toxicity in humans could be predicted with a test 
sensitivity, specificity and balanced accuracy of 73%, 92%, and 83%, 
respectively. The method was applied to another set of 26 drugs and chemicals 
with unclear annotation and their hepatocyte toxicity in humans was predicted. 
The results also revealed that the identified discriminative phenotypic changes 
were related to cell death and cellular senescence. Whereas cell death-related 
endpoints are widely applied in in vitro toxicology, cellular senescence-related 
endpoints are not, although cellular senescence can be induced by various drugs 
and other small molecule compounds and plays an important role in liver injury 
and disease. These findings show how phenotypic profiling can reveal unexpected 
chemical-induced mechanisms in toxicology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-020-02778-3
PMID: 32533217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev. 2018;36(4):219-236. doi: 
10.1080/10590501.2018.1537148. Epub 2018 Nov 14.

Target-specific toxicity knowledgebase (TsTKb): a novel toolkit for in silico 
predictive toxicology.

Li Y(1), Idakwo G(2), Thangapandian S(3), Chen M(4), Hong H(4), Zhang C(2), Gong 
P(3).

Author information:
(1)a Bennett Aerospace Inc. , Cary , NC , USA.
(2)b School of Computing Science and Computer Engineering , University of 
Southern Mississippi , Hattiesburg , MS , USA.
(3)c Environmental Laboratory , US Army Engineer Research and Development Center 
, Vicksburg , MS , USA.
(4)d Division of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics , National Center for 
Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration , Jefferson , AR , USA.

As the number of man-made chemicals increases at an unprecedented pace, efforts 
of quickly screening and accurately evaluating their potential adverse 
biological effects have been hampered by prohibitively high costs of in 
vivo/vitro toxicity testing. While it is unrealistic and unnecessary to test 
every uncharacterized chemical, it remains a major challenge to develop 
alternative in silico tools with high reliability and precision in toxicity 
prediction. To address this urgent need, we have developed a novel 
mode-of-action-guided, molecular modeling-based, and machine learning-enabled 
modeling approach for in silico chemical toxicity prediction. Here we introduce 
the core element of this approach, Target-specific Toxicity Knowledgebase 
(TsTKb), which consists of two main components: Chemical Mode of Action 
(ChemMoA) database and a suite of prediction model libraries.

DOI: 10.1080/10590501.2018.1537148
PMID: 30426823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Toxicol Sci. 2018 Mar 1;162(1):146-166. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx235.

Investigating the Generalizability of the MultiFlow ® DNA Damage Assay and 
Several Companion Machine Learning Models With a Set of 103 Diverse Test 
Chemicals.

Bryce SM(1), Bernacki DT(1), Smith-Roe SL(2), Witt KL(2), Bemis JC(1), Dertinger 
SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Litron Laboratories, Rochester, New York.
(2)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

The in vitro MultiFlow DNA Damage assay multiplexes p53, γH2AX, phospho-histone 
H3, and polyploidization biomarkers into 1 flow cytometric analysis (Bryce, S. 
M., Bernacki, D. T., Bemis, J. C., and Dertinger, S. D. (2016). Genotoxic mode 
of action predictions from a multiplexed flow cytometric assay and a machine 
learning approach. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 57, 171-189). The work reported herein 
evaluated the generalizability of the method, as well as several data analytics 
strategies, to a range of chemical classes not studied previously. TK6 cells 
were exposed to each of 103 diverse chemicals, 86 of which were supplied by the 
National Toxicology Program (NTP) and selected based upon responses in genetic 
damage assays conducted under the Tox21 program. Exposures occurred for 24 h 
over a range of concentrations, and cell aliquots were removed at 4 and 24 h for 
analysis. Multiplexed response data were evaluated using 3 machine learning 
models designed to predict genotoxic mode of action based on data from a 
training set of 85 previously studied chemicals. Of 54 chemicals with sufficient 
information to make an a priori call on genotoxic potential, the prediction 
models' accuracies were 79.6% (random forest), 88.9% (logistic regression), and 
90.7% (artificial neural network). A majority vote ensemble of the 3 models 
provided 92.6% accuracy. Forty-nine NTP chemicals were not adequately tested 
(maximum concentration did not approach assay's cytotoxicity limit) and/or had 
insufficient conventional genotoxicity data to allow their genotoxic potential 
to be defined. For these chemicals MultiFlow data will be useful in future 
research and hypothesis testing. Collectively, the results suggest the MultiFlow 
assay and associated data analysis strategies are broadly generalizable, 
demonstrating high predictability when applied to new chemicals and classes of 
compounds.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfx235
PMCID: PMC6059150
PMID: 29106658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Chem. 2022 Jul 3;68(7):906-916. doi: 10.1093/clinchem/hvac027.

Machine Learning to Assist in Large-Scale, Activity-Based Synthetic Cannabinoid 
Receptor Agonist Screening of Serum Samples.

Janssens LK(1), Boeckaerts D(2), Hudson S(3), Morozova D(1), Cannaert A(1), Wood 
DM(4)(5), Wolfe C(4)(6), De Baets B(2), Stock M(2)(7), Dargan PI(4)(5), Stove 
CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Department of Bioanalysis, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)KERMIT, Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modelling, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)LGC Ltd-Sport and Specialised Analytical Services, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Clinical Toxicology, Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(7)BIOBIX, Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modelling, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Clin Chem. 2022 May 25;:

BACKGROUND: Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists (SCRAs) are amongst the 
largest groups of new psychoactive substances (NPS). Their often high activity 
at the CB1 cannabinoid receptor frequently results in intoxication, imposing 
serious health risks. Hence, continuous monitoring of these compounds is 
important, but challenged by the rapid emergence of novel analogues that are 
missed by traditional targeted detection strategies. We addressed this need by 
performing an activity-based, universal screening on a large set (n = 968) of 
serum samples from patients presenting to the emergency department with acute 
recreational drug or NPS toxicity.
METHODS: We assessed the performance of an activity-based method in detecting 
newly circulating SCRAs compared with liquid chromatography coupled to 
high-resolution mass spectrometry. Additionally, we developed and evaluated 
machine learning models to reduce the screening workload by automating 
interpretation of the activity-based screening output.
RESULTS: Activity-based screening delivered outstanding performance, with a 
sensitivity of 94.6% and a specificity of 98.5%. Furthermore, the developed 
machine learning models allowed accurate distinction between positive and 
negative patient samples in an automatic manner, closely matching the manual 
scoring of samples. The performance of the model depended on the predefined 
threshold, e.g., at a threshold of 0.055, sensitivity and specificity were both 
94.0%.
CONCLUSION: The activity-based bioassay is an ideal candidate for untargeted 
screening of novel SCRAs. The combination of this universal screening assay and 
a machine learning approach for automated sample scoring is a promising 
complement to conventional analytical methods in clinical practice.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2022. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/clinchem/hvac027
PMID: 35266984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Jun 16;8:377. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00377. eCollection 
2017.

Nano-Lazar: Read across Predictions for Nanoparticle Toxicities with Calculated 
and Measured Properties.

Helma C(1), Rautenberg M(1), Gebele D(1).

Author information:
(1)In Silico Toxicology gmbhBasel, Switzerland.

The lazar framework for read across predictions was expanded for the prediction 
of nanoparticle toxicities, and a new methodology for calculating nanoparticle 
descriptors from core and coating structures was implemented. Nano-lazar 
provides a flexible and reproducible framework for downloading data and 
ontologies from the open eNanoMapper infrastructure, developing and validating 
nanoparticle read across models, open-source code and a free graphical interface 
for nanoparticle read-across predictions. In this study we compare different 
nanoparticle descriptor sets and local regression algorithms. Sixty independent 
crossvalidation experiments were performed for the Net Cell Association endpoint 
of the Protein Corona dataset. The best RMSE and r2 results originated from 
models with protein corona descriptors and the weighted random forest algorithm, 
but their 95% prediction interval is significantly less accurate than for models 
with simpler descriptor sets (measured and calculated nanoparticle properties). 
The most accurate prediction intervals were obtained with measured nanoparticle 
properties (no statistical significant difference (p < 0.05) of RMSE and r2 
values compared to protein corona descriptors). Calculated descriptors are 
interesting for cheap and fast high-throughput screening purposes. RMSE and 
prediction intervals of random forest models are comparable to protein corona 
models, but r2 values are significantly lower.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00377
PMCID: PMC5472659
PMID: 28670277


170. Bioinformatics. 2009 Jan 1;25(1):112-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn586. Epub 
2008 Nov 14.

Genetic algorithms for simultaneous variable and sample selection in 
metabonomics.

Cavill R(1), Keun HC, Holmes E, Lindon JC, Nicholson JK, Ebbels TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Division of Surgery, Oncology, 
Reproductive Biology and Anaesthetics, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, South Kensington, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. 
r.cavill@imperial.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Metabolic profiles derived from high resolution (1)H-NMR data are 
complex, therefore statistical and machine learning approaches are vital for 
extracting useful information and biological insights. Focused modelling on 
targeted subsets of metabolites and samples can improve the predictive ability 
of models, and techniques such as genetic algorithms (GAs) have a proven utility 
in feature selection problems. The Consortium for Metabonomic Toxicology (COMET) 
obtained temporal NMR spectra of urine from rats treated with model toxins and 
stressors. Here, we develop a GA approach which simultaneously selects sets of 
samples and spectral regions from the COMET database to build robust, predictive 
classifiers of liver and kidney toxicity.
RESULTS: The results indicate that using simultaneous sample and variable 
selection improved performance by over 9% compared with either method alone. 
Simultaneous selection also halved computation time. Successful classifiers 
repeatedly selected particular variables indicating that this approach can aid 
defining biomarkers of toxicity. Novel visualizations of the results from 
multiple computations were developed to aid the interpretability of which 
samples and variables were frequently selected. This method provides an 
efficient way to determine the most discriminatory variables and samples for any 
post-genomic dataset.
AVAILABILITY: GA code available from 
http://www1.imperial.ac.uk/medicine/people/r.cavill/

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn586
PMID: 19010803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Chem Inf Model. 2019 May 28;59(5):1839-1848. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00794. 
Epub 2019 Feb 11.

Machine Learning Consensus To Predict the Binding to the Androgen Receptor 
within the CoMPARA Project.

Grisoni F(1), Consonni V(1), Ballabio D(1).

Author information:
(1)Milano Chemometrics & QSAR Research Group, Department of Earth and 
Environmental Sciences , University of Milano-Bicocca , piazza della Scienza 1 , 
IT-20126 Milano , Italy.

The nuclear androgen receptor (AR) is one of the most relevant biological 
targets of Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals (EDCs), which produce adverse effects 
by interfering with hormonal regulation and endocrine system functioning. This 
paper describes novel in silico models to identify organic AR modulators in the 
context of the Collaborative Modeling Project of Androgen Receptor Activity 
(CoMPARA), coordinated by the National Center of Computational Toxicology (U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency). The collaborative project involved 35 
international research groups to prioritize the experimental tests of 
approximatively 40k compounds, based on the predictions provided by each 
participant. In this paper, we describe our machine learning approach to predict 
the binding to AR, which is based on a consensus of a multivariate Bernoulli 
Naive Bayes, a Random Forest, and N-Nearest Neighbor classification models. The 
approach was developed in compliance with the Organization of Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) principles, trained on 1687 ToxCast molecules 
classified according to 11 in vitro assays, and further validated on a set of 
3,882 external compounds. The models provided robust and reliable predictions 
and were used to gather novel data-driven insights on the structural features 
related to AR binding, agonism, and antagonism.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00794
PMID: 30668916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Chem Inf Model. 2007 May-Jun;47(3):998-1006. doi: 10.1021/ci600223d. Epub 2007 
Apr 24.

A novel logic-based approach for quantitative toxicology prediction.

Amini A(1), Muggleton SH, Lodhi H, Sternberg MJ.

Author information:
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Centre for Bioinformatics, Division of 
Molecular Biosciences, and Computational Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department 
of Computing, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.

There is a pressing need for accurate in silico methods to predict the toxicity 
of molecules that are being introduced into the environment or are being 
developed into new pharmaceuticals. Predictive toxicology is in the realm of 
structure activity relationships (SAR), and many approaches have been used to 
derive such SAR. Previous work has shown that inductive logic programming (ILP) 
is a powerful approach that circumvents several major difficulties, such as 
molecular superposition, faced by some other SAR methods. The ILP approach 
reasons with chemical substructures within a relational framework and yields 
chemically understandable rules. Here, we report a general new approach, support 
vector inductive logic programming (SVILP), which extends the essentially 
qualitative ILP-based SAR to quantitative modeling. First, ILP is used to learn 
rules, the predictions of which are then used within a novel kernel to derive a 
support-vector generalization model. For a highly heterogeneous dataset of 576 
molecules with known fathead minnow fish toxicity, the cross-validated 
correlation coefficients (R2CV) from a chemical descriptor method (CHEM) and 
SVILP are 0.52 and 0.66, respectively. The ILP, CHEM, and SVILP approaches 
correctly predict 55, 58, and 73%, respectively, of toxic molecules. In a set of 
165 unseen molecules, the R2 values from the commercial software TOPKAT and 
SVILP are 0.26 and 0.57, respectively. In all calculations, SVILP showed 
significant improvements in comparison with the other methods. The SVILP 
approach has a major advantage in that it uses ILP automatically and 
consistently to derive rules, mostly novel, describing fragments that are 
toxicity alerts. The SVILP is a general machine-learning approach and has the 
potential of tackling many problems relevant to chemoinformatics including in 
silico drug design.

DOI: 10.1021/ci600223d
PMID: 17451225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Front Genet. 2021 Jul 1;12:661075. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.661075. eCollection 
2021.

Prediction of Alternative Drug-Induced Liver Injury Classifications Using 
Molecular Descriptors, Gene Expression Perturbation, and Toxicology Reports.

Lesiński W(1), Mnich K(2), Rudnicki WR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Computer Science, University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland.
(2)Computational Center, University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland.

Motivation: Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is one of the primary problems in 
drug development. Early prediction of DILI, based on the chemical properties of 
substances and experiments performed on cell lines, would bring a significant 
reduction in the cost of clinical trials and faster development of drugs. The 
current study aims to build predictive models of risk of DILI for chemical 
compounds using multiple sources of information. Methods: Using several 
supervised machine learning algorithms, we built predictive models for several 
alternative splits of compounds between DILI and non-DILI classes. To this end, 
we used chemical properties of the given compounds, their effects on gene 
expression levels in six human cell lines treated with them, as well as their 
toxicological profiles. First, we identified the most informative variables in 
all data sets. Then, these variables were used to build machine learning models. 
Finally, composite models were built with the Super Learner approach. All 
modeling was performed using multiple repeats of cross-validation for unbiased 
and precise estimates of performance. Results: With one exception, gene 
expression profiles of human cell lines were non-informative and resulted in 
random models. Toxicological reports were not useful for prediction of DILI. The 
best results were obtained for models discerning between harmless compounds and 
those for which any level of DILI was observed (AUC = 0.75). These models were 
built with Random Forest algorithm that used molecular descriptors.

Copyright © 2021 Lesiński, Mnich and Rudnicki.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.661075
PMCID: PMC8282233
PMID: 34276771

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


174. Toxicol Sci. 2022 Mar 28;186(2):242-259. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab157.

Tox-GAN: An Artificial Intelligence Approach Alternative to Animal Studies-A 
Case Study With Toxicogenomics.

Chen X(1), Roberts R(2)(3), Tong W(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA.
(2)ApconiX Ltd, Alderley Edge SK10 4TG, UK.
(3)Department of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Animal studies are a critical component in biomedical research, pharmaceutical 
product development, and regulatory submissions. There is a worldwide effort in 
toxicology toward "reducing, refining, and replacing" animal use. Here, we 
proposed a deep generative adversarial network (GAN)-based framework capable of 
deriving new animal results from existing animal studies without additional 
experiments. To prove the concept, we employed this Tox-GAN framework to 
generate both gene activities and expression profiles for multiple doses and 
treatment durations in toxicogenomics (TGx). Using the pre-existing rat liver 
TGx data from the Open Toxicogenomics Project-Genomics-Assisted Toxicity 
Evaluation System (Open TG-GATES), we generated Tox-GAN transcriptomic profiles 
with high similarity (0.997 ± 0.002 in intensity and 0.740 ± 0.082 in fold 
change) to the corresponding real gene expression profiles. Consequently, 
Tox-GAN showed an outstanding performance in 2 critical TGx applications, 
gaining a molecular understanding of underlying toxicological mechanisms and 
gene expression-based biomarker development. For the former, over 87% agreement 
in Gene Ontology was found between Tox-GAN results and real gene expression 
data. For the latter, the concordance of biomarkers between real and generated 
data was high in both predictive performance and biomarker genes. We also 
demonstrated that the Tox-GAN models constructed with the Open TG-GATES data 
were capable of generating transcriptomic profiles reported in DrugMatrix. 
Finally, we demonstrated potential utility for Tox-GAN in aiding chemical-based 
read-across. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed Tox-GAN model is novel 
in its ability to generate in vivo transcriptomic profiles at different 
treatment conditions from chemical structures. Overall, Tox-GAN holds great 
promise for generating high-quality toxicogenomic profiles without animal 
experimentation.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology 
2021. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public 
domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab157
PMID: 34971401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 May 19;9:241. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-241.

A comparison of machine learning algorithms for chemical toxicity classification 
using a simulated multi-scale data model.

Judson R(1), Elloumi F, Setzer RW, Li Z, Shah I.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Computational Toxicology, Office of Research and 
Development, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina 27711, USA. judson.richard@epa.gov

BACKGROUND: Bioactivity profiling using high-throughput in vitro assays can 
reduce the cost and time required for toxicological screening of environmental 
chemicals and can also reduce the need for animal testing. Several public 
efforts are aimed at discovering patterns or classifiers in high-dimensional 
bioactivity space that predict tissue, organ or whole animal toxicological 
endpoints. Supervised machine learning is a powerful approach to discover 
combinatorial relationships in complex in vitro/in vivo datasets. We present a 
novel model to simulate complex chemical-toxicology data sets and use this model 
to evaluate the relative performance of different machine learning (ML) methods.
RESULTS: The classification performance of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), 
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Naïve Bayes (NB), 
Recursive Partitioning and Regression Trees (RPART), and Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) in the presence and absence of filter-based feature selection was analyzed 
using K-way cross-validation testing and independent validation on simulated in 
vitro assay data sets with varying levels of model complexity, number of 
irrelevant features and measurement noise. While the prediction accuracy of all 
ML methods decreased as non-causal (irrelevant) features were added, some ML 
methods performed better than others. In the limit of using a large number of 
features, ANN and SVM were always in the top performing set of methods while 
RPART and KNN (k = 5) were always in the poorest performing set. The addition of 
measurement noise and irrelevant features decreased the classification accuracy 
of all ML methods, with LDA suffering the greatest performance degradation. LDA 
performance is especially sensitive to the use of feature selection. 
Filter-based feature selection generally improved performance, most strikingly 
for LDA.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel simulation model to evaluate machine 
learning methods for the analysis of data sets in which in vitro bioassay data 
is being used to predict in vivo chemical toxicology. From our analysis, we can 
recommend that several ML methods, most notably SVM and ANN, are good candidates 
for use in real world applications in this area.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-241
PMCID: PMC2409339
PMID: 18489778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Talanta. 2020 Jan 15;207:120299. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120299. Epub 2019 
Aug 26.

Machine learning for mixture toxicity analysis based on high-throughput printing 
technology.

Duan Q(1), Hu Y(1), Zheng S(1), Lee J(2), Chen J(2), Bi S(2), Xu Z(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory of Vehicle Emissions Control, School of the Environment, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing 210023, China.
(2)Department of Environment Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710062, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory of Vehicle Emissions Control, School of the Environment, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing 210023, China. Electronic address: zhaoyixu@nju.edu.cn.

Analysis on mixture toxicity (Mix-tox) of the multi-chemical space is constantly 
followed with interest for many researchers. Conventional toxicity tests with 
time-consuming and costly operations make researchers can only establish some 
toxicity prediction models aiming to a limited sampling dimension. The rapid 
development of machine learning (ML) algorithm will accelerate the exploration 
of many fields involving toxicity analysis. Rather than the model calculation 
capacity, the challenge of this process mainly comes from the lack of toxicology 
big-data to perform toxicity perception through the ML model. In this paper, a 
full strategy based a standardized high-throughput experiment was developed for 
Mix-tox analysis throughout the whole routine, from big-sample dataset design, 
model building, and training, to the toxicity prediction. Using the 
concentration variates as input and bio-luminescent inhibition rate as output, 
it turned out that a well-trained random forest algorithm was successfully 
applied to assess the mixtures' toxicity effect, suggesting its value in 
facilitating adoption of Mix-tox analysis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.talanta.2019.120299
PMID: 31594611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2022 Jun;18(4):909-920. doi: 10.1002/ieam.4493. 
Epub 2021 Aug 20.

Novel approach to large-scale monitoring of submerged aquatic vegetation: A 
nationwide example from Sweden.

Huber S(1), Hansen LB(1), Nielsen LT(1), Rasmussen ML(1), Sølvsteen J(1), 
Berglund J(2), Paz von Friesen C(2), Danbolt M(3), Envall M(4), Infantes E(4), 
Moksnes P(4).

Author information:
(1)DHI GRAS A/S, Hørsholm, Denmark.
(2)Länsstyrelsen Västerbotten, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Länsstyrelsen Kalmar, Kalmar, Sweden.
(4)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

According to the EU Habitats directive, the Water Framework Directive, and the 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive, member states are required to map, monitor, 
and evaluate changes in quality and areal distribution of different marine 
habitats and biotopes to protect the marine environment more effectively. 
Submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) is a key indicator of the ecological status 
of coastal ecosystems and is therefore widely used in reporting related to these 
directives. Environmental monitoring of the areal distribution of SAV is lacking 
in Sweden due to the challenges of large-scale monitoring using traditional 
small-scale methods. To address this gap, in 2020, we embarked on a project to 
combine Copernicus Sentinel-2 satellite imagery, novel machine learning (ML) 
techniques, and advanced data processing in a cloud-based web application that 
enables users to create up-to-date SAV classifications. At the same time, the 
approach was used to derive the first high-resolution SAV map for the entire 
coastline of Sweden, where an area of 1550 km2 was mapped as SAV. Quantitative 
evaluation of the accuracy of the classification using independent field data 
from three different regions along the Swedish coast demonstrated relative high 
accuracy within shallower areas, particularly where water transparency was high 
(average total accuracy per region 0.60-0.77). However, the classification 
missed large proportions of vegetation growing in deeper water (on average 
31%-50%) and performed poorly in areas with fragmented or mixed vegetation and 
poor water quality, challenges that should be addressed in the development of 
the mapping methods towards integration into monitoring frameworks such as the 
EU directives. In this article, we present the results of the first 
satellite-derived SAV classification for the entire Swedish coast and show the 
implementation of a cloud-based SAV mapping application (prototype) developed 
within the frame of the project. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2022;18:909-920. © 
2021 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

© 2021 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.4493
PMCID: PMC9290658
PMID: 34270169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


178. J Anal Toxicol. 1988 Jul-Aug;12(4):216-24. doi: 10.1093/jat/12.4.216.

Application of expert systems analysis to interpretation of fatal cases 
involving amitriptyline.

Spiehler V(1), Spiehler E, Osselton MD.

Author information:
(1)Central Research Establishment, Home Office Forensic Science Service, 
Aldermaston, Reading, Berkshire, United Kingdom.

Part I. Expert 4: The object of this study was to investigate the applicability 
of commercially available expert system shells to interpretation in forensic 
toxicology. Amitriptyline toxicology was selected as a pilot trial. Blood and 
tissue concentrations of amitriptyline and nortriptyline in fatal and nonfatal 
amitriptyline cases from the literature and from the Registry of Human 
Toxicology databank were entered into the expert system shell Expert 4 (Rivers, 
Elsevier). The statistical evaluation routines of the shell were used to search 
for patterns in the data. Successive changes in the data base were made to test 
for the influence of the data base on the conclusions. Finally the data base was 
refined, based on the evaluations, to strengthen the probabilities of the 
conclusions. The refined database was coupled with the Expert 4 inference engine 
to infer unknown parameters in the cases. The results of the expert system 
analysis were compared to known values and published expert opinions. The ratio 
of amitriptyline/nortriptyline and tissue levels of nortriptyline were found to 
be the most significant measures for interpretation of effect and time since 
ingestion. Part II. Computer Induction of Rules: Blood and tissue concentrations 
of amitriptyline and nortriptyline in fatal and nonfatal amitriptyline cases 
from the literature and from the Registry of Human Toxicology databank were 
entered into the expert system shell BEAGLE, (Forsyth, Machine Learning 
Research, Ltd.). The automatic rule induction routines of the shell were used to 
search for patterns in the data. The program expressed these patterns as 
numerical predictions or Boolean logic rules. The results were compared to those 
obtained with the Expert 4 (Rivers, Elsevier) using the same case knowledge 
base.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/jat/12.4.216
PMID: 3184890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 6;112(40):12516-21. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1516645112. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural constructs for predicting neural 
toxicity.

Schwartz MP(1), Hou Z(2), Propson NE(2), Zhang J(2), Engstrom CJ(3), Santos 
Costa V(4), Jiang P(2), Nguyen BK(2), Bolin JM(2), Daly W(1), Wang Y(2), Stewart 
R(2), Page CD(3), Murphy WL(5), Thomson JA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706;
(2)Regenerative Biology, Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715;
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI 53792; Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI 53706;
(4)Center for Research in Advanced Computing Systems, Institute for Systems and 
Computer Engineering, Technology and Science, and Department of Computer 
Science, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto 4169-007, Portugal;
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706; Department of Orthopedics and Rehabilitation, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI 53705;
(6)Regenerative Biology, Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715; 
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53705; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, 
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 jthomson@morgridge.org.

Human pluripotent stem cell-based in vitro models that reflect human physiology 
have the potential to reduce the number of drug failures in clinical trials and 
offer a cost-effective approach for assessing chemical safety. Here, human 
embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived neural progenitor cells, endothelial cells, 
mesenchymal stem cells, and microglia/macrophage precursors were combined on 
chemically defined polyethylene glycol hydrogels and cultured in serum-free 
medium to model cellular interactions within the developing brain. The 
precursors self-assembled into 3D neural constructs with diverse neuronal and 
glial populations, interconnected vascular networks, and ramified microglia. 
Replicate constructs were reproducible by RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and expressed 
neurogenesis, vasculature development, and microglia genes. Linear support 
vector machines were used to construct a predictive model from RNA-Seq data for 
240 neural constructs treated with 34 toxic and 26 nontoxic chemicals. The 
predictive model was evaluated using two standard hold-out testing methods: a 
nearly unbiased leave-one-out cross-validation for the 60 training compounds and 
an unbiased blinded trial using a single hold-out set of 10 additional 
chemicals. The linear support vector produced an estimate for future data of 
0.91 in the cross-validation experiment and correctly classified 9 of 10 
chemicals in the blinded trial.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1516645112
PMCID: PMC4603492
PMID: 26392547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: W.L.M. is a 
founder and stockholder for Stem Pharm, Inc., and Tissue Regeneration Systems, 
Inc.


180. Heliyon. 2020 Aug 6;6(8):e04639. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04639. eCollection 
2020 Aug.

Predicting novel drugs for SARS-CoV-2 using machine learning from a >10 million 
chemical space.

Kowalewski J(1), Ray A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of California, Riverside, 
CA 92521, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California, 
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

There is an urgent need for the identification of effective therapeutics for 
COVID-19 and we have developed a machine learning drug discovery pipeline to 
identify several drug candidates. First, we collect assay data for 65 target 
human proteins known to interact with the SARS-CoV-2 proteins, including the 
ACE2 receptor. Next, we train machine learning models to predict inhibitory 
activity and use them to screen FDA registered chemicals and approved drugs 
(~100,000) and ~14 million purchasable chemicals. We filter predictions 
according to estimated mammalian toxicity and vapor pressure. Prospective 
volatile candidates are proposed as novel inhaled therapeutics since the nasal 
cavity and respiratory tracts are early bottlenecks for infection. We also 
identify candidates that act across multiple targets as promising for future 
analyses. We anticipate that this theoretical study can accelerate testing of 
two categories of therapeutics: repurposed drugs suited for short-term approval, 
and novel efficacious drugs suitable for a long-term follow up.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04639
PMCID: PMC7409807
PMID: 32802980


181. J Chem Inf Comput Sci. 2000 Jul-Aug;40(4):906-14. doi: 10.1021/ci990116i.

Symbolic, neural, and Bayesian machine learning models for predicting 
carcinogenicity of chemical compounds.

Bahler D(1), Stone B, Wellington C, Bristol DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 
27695-8206, USA. bahler@ncsu.edu

Experimental programs have been underway for several years to determine the 
environmental effects of chemical compounds, mixtures, and the like. Among these 
programs is the National Toxicology Program (NTP) on rodent carcinogenicity. 
Because these experiments are costly and time-consuming, the rate at which test 
articles (i.e., chemicals) can be tested is limited. The ability to predict the 
outcome of the analysis at various points in the process would facilitate 
informed decisions about the allocation of testing resources. To assist human 
experts in organizing an empirical testing regime, and to try to shed light on 
mechanisms of toxicity, we constructed toxicity models using various machine 
learning and data mining methods, both existing and those of our own devising. 
These models took the form of decision trees, rule sets, neural networks, rules 
extracted from trained neural networks, and Bayesian classifiers. As a training 
set, we used recent results from rodent carcinogenicity bioassays conducted by 
the NTP on 226 test articles. We performed 10-way cross-validation on each of 
our models to approximate their expected error rates on unseen data. The data 
set consists of physical-chemical parameters of test articles, alerting chemical 
substructures, salmonella mutagenicity assay results, subchronic histopathology 
data, and information on route, strain, and sex/species for 744 individual 
experiments. These results contribute to the ongoing process of evaluating and 
interpreting the data collected from chemical toxicity studies.

DOI: 10.1021/ci990116i
PMID: 10955517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Forensic Sci. 1989 Sep;34(5):1104-15.

Computer-assisted interpretation in forensic toxicology: morphine-involved 
deaths.

Spiehler VR(1).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic Products Corporation, Los Angeles, CA 90045.

Case data from 200 morphine-involved deaths (Spiehler, V. and Brown, R., Journal 
of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 1987, pp. 906-916) were analyzed for 
patterns and relationships using artificial intelligence (AI) computer software. 
Case parameters were blood unconjugated morphine, blood, brain, and liver total 
morphine, sex, age, frequency of use, time of death after injection, cause of 
death, and presence of other drugs. The programs used were Expert 4 
(Biosoft-Cambridge), BEAGLE (Warm Boot, Ltd.), and KnowledgeMaker (Knowledge 
Garden Inc.). Interpretation was defined as estimating the dose, response, and 
time after drug dosing. The AI programs were used to advise on time and response 
outcomes for cases, to calculate the probability of the estimate being true, to 
develop rules for interpretation of morphine-involved cases, and to diagram a 
decision tree. On known cases the AI programs were successful 70 to 90% of the 
time in classifying the cases as to response and time. No data on dose were 
available in this database. The success rate in individual cases was 
proportional to the program-estimated probability. All three programs found the 
case parameters of most value in predicting response to be blood unconjugated 
morphine, blood total morphine, and liver total morphine. The case data most 
useful in estimating time of death since drug injection were blood unconjugated 
morphine, percent unconjugated morphine in blood, and brain total morphine. The 
rule induction programs found that morphine overdoses were characterized by 
blood unconjugated morphine greater than 0.24 micrograms/mL, liver morphine 
greater than 0.50 to 0.75 micrograms/g, brain morphine greater than 0.08 
micrograms/g or greater than blood unconjugated morphine, and percent blood 
unconjugated morphine greater than 37%. Rapid deaths were characterized by 
percent unconjugated morphine greater than 44 to 50%; blood unconjugated 
morphine, as a function of other drugs present, greater than 0.09 to 0.21 
micrograms/mL; and brain total morphine greater than 0.16 to 0.22 micrograms/g. 
This work demonstrates that inexpensive AI programs commercially available for 
personal computers can be useful in interpretation in forensic toxicology.

PMID: 2809541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Feb;1853(2):348-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.11.002. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Quantitative analysis of mitochondrial morphology and membrane potential in 
living cells using high-content imaging, machine learning, and morphological 
binning.

Leonard AP(1), Cameron RB(2), Speiser JL(3), Wolf BJ(3), Peterson YK(2), 
Schnellmann RG(2), Beeson CC(2), Rohrer B(4).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Ophthalmology, Medical University of South Carolina, USA; Dept. of 
Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
USA.
(2)Dept. of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Dept. of Public Health Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, USA.
(4)Dept. of Ophthalmology, Medical University of South Carolina, USA; Ralph H. 
Johnson Memorial Veteran's Administration Hospital, USA.

Understanding the processes of mitochondrial dynamics (fission, fusion, 
biogenesis, and mitophagy) has been hampered by the lack of automated, 
deterministic methods to measure mitochondrial morphology from microscopic 
images. A method to quantify mitochondrial morphology and function is presented 
here using a commercially available automated high-content wide-field 
fluorescent microscopy platform and R programming-language-based semi-automated 
data analysis to achieve high throughput morphological categorization (puncta, 
rod, network, and large & round) and quantification of mitochondrial membrane 
potential. In conjunction with cellular respirometry to measure mitochondrial 
respiratory capacity, this method detected that increasing concentrations of 
toxicants known to directly or indirectly affect mitochondria (t-butyl 
hydroperoxide [TBHP], rotenone, antimycin A, oligomycin, ouabain, and carbonyl 
cyanide-p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone [FCCP]), decreased mitochondrial 
networked areas in cultured 661w cells to 0.60-0.80 at concentrations that 
inhibited respiratory capacity to 0.20-0.70 (fold change compared to vehicle). 
Concomitantly, mitochondrial swelling was increased from 1.4- to 2.3-fold of 
vehicle as indicated by changes in large & round areas in response to TBHP, 
oligomycin, or ouabain. Finally, the automated identification of mitochondrial 
location enabled accurate quantification of mitochondrial membrane potential by 
measuring intramitochondrial tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) 
fluorescence intensity. Administration of FCCP depolarized and administration of 
oligomycin hyperpolarized mitochondria, as evidenced by changes in 
intramitochondrial TMRM fluorescence intensities to 0.33- or 5.25-fold of 
vehicle control values, respectively. In summary, this high-content imaging 
method accurately quantified mitochondrial morphology and membrane potential in 
hundreds of thousands of cells on a per-cell basis, with sufficient throughput 
for pharmacological or toxicological evaluation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.11.002
PMCID: PMC4289477
PMID: 25447550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2425:637-674. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_24.

Increasing the Value of Data Within a Large Pharmaceutical Company Through In 
Silico Models.

Brigo A(1), Naga D(2)(3), Muster W(2).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche 
Innovation Centre Basel, Basel, Switzerland. alessandro.brigo@roche.com.
(2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche 
Innovation Centre Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Group of Pharmacoinformatics, 
University of Vienna, Wien, Austria.

The present contribution describes how in silico models and methods are applied 
at different stages of the drug discovery process in the pharmaceutical 
industry. A description of the most relevant computational methods and tools is 
given along with an evaluation of their performance in the assessment of 
potential genotoxic impurities and the prediction of off-target in vitro 
pharmacology. The challenges of predicting the outcome of highly complex in vivo 
studies are discussed followed by considerations on how novel ways to manage, 
store, exchange, and analyze data may advance knowledge and facilitate modeling 
efforts. In this context, the current status of broad data sharing initiatives, 
namely, eTOX and eTransafe, will be described along with related projects that 
could significantly reduce the use of animals in drug discovery in the future.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1960-5_24
PMID: 35188649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Toxicol Res (Camb). 2016 Apr 26;5(4):1029-1038. doi: 10.1039/c6tx00083e. 
eCollection 2016 Jul 1.

QSAR modeling for predicting reproductive toxicity of chemicals in rats for 
regulatory purposes.

Basant N(1), Gupta S(2), Singh KP(2).

Author information:
(1)ETRC , Gomtinagar , Lucknow-226 010 , India.
(2)Environmental Chemistry Division , CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research , Post Box 80 , Mahatma Gandhi Marg , Lucknow-226 001 , India . Email: 
kpsingh_52@yahoo.com ; Email: kunwarpsingh@gmail.com.

The experimental determination of multi-generation reproductive toxicity of 
chemicals involves high costs and a large number of animal studies over a long 
period of time. Computational toxicology offers possibilities to overcome such 
difficulties. In this study, we have established ensemble machine learning (EML) 
based quantitative structure-activity relationship models for predicting the 
reproductive toxicity potential (LOAEL) of structurally diverse chemicals in 
accordance with the OECD guidelines. Accordingly, decision tree forest (DTF) and 
decision tree boost (DTB) QSAR models were developed using a novel dataset 
composed of the toxicity endpoints for 334 chemicals. Relevant structural 
features of chemicals responsible for toxicity potential were identified and 
used in QSAR modeling. The generalization and prediction abilities of the 
constructed QSAR models were evaluated by internal and external validation 
procedures and by deriving several stringent statistical criteria parameters. In 
the test set, the two models (DTF and DTB) yielded R2 of 0.856 and 0.945, 
between the experimental and predicted endpoint toxicity values. The models were 
also evaluated for predictive use through the most recent criteria based on root 
mean squared error (RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). The values of various 
statistical validation coefficients derived for the test data were above their 
respective threshold limits and thus put a high confidence in this analysis. The 
applicability domains of the constructed QSAR models were defined using the 
leverage and standardization approaches. The results suggest that the proposed 
QSAR models can reliably predict the reproductive toxicity potential of diverse 
chemicals and can be useful tools for screening new chemicals for safety 
assessment.

DOI: 10.1039/c6tx00083e
PMCID: PMC6062388
PMID: 30090410


186. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 23;21(21):7853. doi: 10.3390/ijms21217853.

A Toxicity Prediction Tool for Potential Agonist/Antagonist Activities in 
Molecular Initiating Events Based on Chemical Structures.

Kurosaki K(1), Wu R(1), Uesawa Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Informatics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 
2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588, Japan.

Because the health effects of many compounds are unknown, regulatory toxicology 
must often rely on the development of quantitative structure-activity 
relationship (QSAR) models to efficiently discover molecular initiating events 
(MIEs) in the adverse-outcome pathway (AOP) framework. However, the QSAR models 
used in numerous toxicity prediction studies are publicly unavailable, and thus, 
they are challenging to use in practical applications. Approaches that 
simultaneously identify the various toxic responses induced by a compound are 
also scarce. The present study develops Toxicity Predictor, a web application 
tool that comprehensively identifies potential MIEs. Using various chemicals in 
the Toxicology in the 21st Century (Tox21) 10K library, we identified potential 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) using a machine-learning approach. Based 
on the optimized three-dimensional (3D) molecular structures and XGBoost 
algorithm, we established molecular descriptors for QSAR models. Their 
predictive performances and applicability domain were evaluated and applied to 
Toxicity Predictor. The prediction performance of the constructed models matched 
that of the top model in the Tox21 Data Challenge 2014. These advanced 
prediction results for MIEs are freely available on the Internet.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21217853
PMCID: PMC7660166
PMID: 33113912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


187. Environ Pollut. 2022 Aug 15;307:119584. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2022.119584. Epub 
2022 Jun 7.

Critical features identification for chemical chronic toxicity based on 
mechanistic forecast models.

Wang X(1), Li F(2), Chen J(3), Teng Y(1), Ji C(4), Wu H(4).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes and Ecological 
Remediation, Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research (YIC), Chinese Academy of 
Sciences (CAS), Shandong Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes, 
YICCAS, Yantai, 264003, PR China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100049, PR China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes and Ecological 
Remediation, Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research (YIC), Chinese Academy of 
Sciences (CAS), Shandong Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes, 
YICCAS, Yantai, 264003, PR China; Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, PR China. Electronic address: fli@yic.ac.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Linggong Road 2, Dalian, 116024, China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes and Ecological 
Remediation, Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research (YIC), Chinese Academy of 
Sciences (CAS), Shandong Key Laboratory of Coastal Environmental Processes, 
YICCAS, Yantai, 264003, PR China; Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, PR China.

Facing billions of tons of pollutants entering the ocean each year, aquatic 
toxicity is becoming a crucial endpoint for evaluating chemical adverse effects 
on ecosystems. Notably, huge amount of toxic chemicals at environmental relevant 
doses can cause potential adverse effects. However, chronic aquatic toxicity 
effects of chemicals are much scarcer, especially at population level. Rotifers 
are highly sensitive to toxicants even at chronic low-doses and their 
communities are usually considered as effective indicators for assessing the 
status of aquatic ecosystems. Therefore, the no observed effect concentration 
(NOEC) for population abundance of rotifers were selected as endpoints to 
develop machine learning models for the prediction of chemical aquatic chronic 
toxicity. In this study, forty-eight binary models were built by eight types of 
chemical descriptors combined with six machine learning algorithms. The best 
binary model was 1D & 2D molecular descriptors - random trees model (RT) with 
high balanced accuracy (BA) (0.83 for training and 0.83 for validation set), and 
Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) (0.72 for training set and 0.67 for 
validation set). Moreover, the optimal model identified the primary factors 
(SpMAD_Dzp, AMW, MATS2v) and filtered out three high alerting substructures 
[c1cc(Cl)cc1, CNCO, CCOP(=S)(OCC)O] influencing the chronic aquatic toxicity. 
These results showed that the compounds with low molecular volume, high polarity 
and molecular weight could contribute to adverse effects on rotifers, 
facilitating the deeper understanding of chronic toxicity mechanisms. In 
addition, forecast models had better performances than the common models 
embedded into ECOSAR software. This study provided insights into structural 
features responsible for the toxicity of different groups of chemicals and 
thereby allowed for the rational design of green and safer alternatives.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2022.119584
PMID: 35688391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2017 May 4;12(5):e0176682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176682. 
eCollection 2017.

Dynamic species classification of microorganisms across time, abiotic and biotic 
environments-A sliding window approach.

Pennekamp F(1), Griffiths JI(2), Fronhofer EA(1)(3), Garnier A(1), Seymour 
M(3)(4), Altermatt F(1)(3), Petchey OL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Western 
Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Aquatic Ecology, Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic 
Science and Technology, Überlandstrasse 133, CH-8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland.
(4)Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics Laboratory, School of Biological 
Sciences, Bangor University, Deiniol Road, Gwynedd LL57 2UW, United Kingdom.

The development of video-based monitoring methods allows for rapid, dynamic and 
accurate monitoring of individuals or communities, compared to slower 
traditional methods, with far reaching ecological and evolutionary applications. 
Large amounts of data are generated using video-based methods, which can be 
effectively processed using machine learning (ML) algorithms into meaningful 
ecological information. ML uses user defined classes (e.g. species), derived 
from a subset (i.e. training data) of video-observed quantitative features (e.g. 
phenotypic variation), to infer classes in subsequent observations. However, 
phenotypic variation often changes due to environmental conditions, which may 
lead to poor classification, if environmentally induced variation in phenotypes 
is not accounted for. Here we describe a framework for classifying species under 
changing environmental conditions based on the random forest classification. A 
sliding window approach was developed that restricts temporal and 
environmentally conditions to improve the classification. We tested our approach 
by applying the classification framework to experimental data. The experiment 
used a set of six ciliate species to monitor changes in community structure and 
behavior over hundreds of generations, in dozens of species combinations and 
across a temperature gradient. Differences in biotic and abiotic conditions 
caused simplistic classification approaches to be unsuccessful. In contrast, the 
sliding window approach allowed classification to be highly successful, as 
phenotypic differences driven by environmental change, could be captured by the 
classifier. Importantly, classification using the random forest algorithm showed 
comparable success when validated against traditional, slower, manual 
identification. Our framework allows for reliable classification in dynamic 
environments, and may help to improve strategies for long-term monitoring of 
species in changing environments. Our classification pipeline can be applied in 
fields assessing species community dynamics, such as eco-toxicology, ecology and 
evolutionary ecology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176682
PMCID: PMC5417602
PMID: 28472193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


189. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2016 Jul;12(3):580-90. doi: 10.1002/ieam.1708. Epub 
2015 Nov 24.

Limitations of toxicity characterization in life cycle assessment: Can adverse 
outcome pathways provide a new foundation?

Gust KA(1), Collier ZA(1), Mayo ML(1), Stanley JK(1), Gong P(1), Chappell MA(1).

Author information:
(1)US Army Engineer Research & Development Center, Vicksburg, Mississippi.

Life cycle assessment (LCA) has considerable merit for holistic evaluation of 
product planning, development, production, and disposal, with the inherent 
benefit of providing a forecast of potential health and environmental impacts. 
However, a technical review of current life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) 
methods revealed limitations within the biological effects assessment protocols, 
including: simplistic assessment approaches and models; an inability to 
integrate emerging types of toxicity data; a reliance on linear impact 
assessment models; a lack of methods to mitigate uncertainty; and no explicit 
consideration of effects in species of concern. The purpose of the current study 
is to demonstrate that a new concept in toxicological and regulatory assessment, 
the adverse outcome pathway (AOP), has many useful attributes of potential use 
to ameliorate many of these problems, to expand data utility and model 
robustness, and to enable more accurate and defensible biological effects 
assessments within LCIA. Background, context, and examples have been provided to 
demonstrate these potential benefits. We additionally propose that these 
benefits can be most effectively realized through development of quantitative 
AOPs (qAOPs) crafted to meet the needs of the LCIA framework. As a means to 
stimulate qAOP research and development in support of LCIA, we propose 3 
conceptual classes of qAOP, each with unique inherent attributes for supporting 
LCIA: 1) mechanistic, including computational toxicology models; 2) 
probabilistic, including Bayesian networks and supervised machine learning 
models; and 3) weight of evidence, including models built using 
decision-analytic methods. Overall, we have highlighted a number of potential 
applications of qAOPs that can refine and add value to LCIA. As the AOP concept 
and support framework matures, we see the potential for qAOPs to serve a 
foundational role for next-generation effects characterization within LCIA. 
Integr Environ Assess Manag 2016;12:580-590. Published 2015. This article is a 
US Government work and is in the public domain in the USA.

Published 2015. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.1708
PMID: 26331849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Drug Test Anal. 2020 Jun;12(6):836-845. doi: 10.1002/dta.2775. Epub 2020 Feb 6.

A machine learning approach for handling big data produced by high resolution 
mass spectrometry after data independent acquisition of small molecules - Proof 
of concept study using an artificial neural network for sample classification.

Streun GL(1), Elmiger MP(1), Dobay A(2)(3), Ebert L(3), Kraemer T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich Institute of 
Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Forensic Genetics, Zurich Institute of Forensic Medicine, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Forensic Imaging/Virtopsy, Zurich Institute of Forensic 
Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) 
enables data independent acquisition (DIA) and untargeted screening. However, to 
avoid the handling of the resulting large dataset, most laboratories in that 
field still use targeted screening methods, which offer good sensitivity and 
specificity but are limited to known compounds. The promising field of machine 
learning offers new possibilities such as artificial neural networks that can be 
trained to classify large amounts of data. In this proof of concept study, we 
exemplify such a machine learning approach for raw HRMS-DIA data files. We 
evaluated a machine learning model using training, validation, and test sets of 
solvent and whole blood samples containing drugs (of abuse) common in forensic 
toxicology. For that purpose, different platforms were used. With a feedforward 
neural network model architecture, a category prediction (blank sample vs. drug 
containing sample) was aimed for. With the applied machine learning approaches, 
the sensitivity and specificity, of the validation and test set, for the 
prediction of sample classes were in a suitable range for an actual use in a 
(routine) laboratory (e.g. workplace drug testing). In conclusion, this proof of 
concept study clearly demonstrated the huge potential of machine learning in the 
analysis of HRMS-DIA data.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dta.2775
PMID: 31997574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2022 Jun;41(6):1359-1369. doi: 10.1002/etc.5328. Epub 2022 
Apr 29.

Predicting Primary Biodegradation of Petroleum Hydrocarbons in Aquatic Systems: 
Integrating System and Molecular Structure Parameters using a Novel 
Machine-Learning Framework.

Davis CW(1), Camenzuli L(2), Redman AD(1).

Author information:
(1)ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Annandale, New Jersey, USA.
(2)ExxonMobil Petroleum & Chemical, Machelen, Belgium.

Quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) models for predicting 
primary biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons have been previously developed. 
These models use experimental data generated under widely varied conditions, the 
effects of which are not captured adequately within model formalisms. As a 
result, they exhibit variable predictive performance and are unable to 
incorporate the role of study design and test conditions on the assessment of 
environmental persistence. To address these limitations, a novel 
machine-learning System-Integrated Model (HC-BioSIM) is presented, which 
integrates chemical structure and test system variability, leading to improved 
prediction of primary disappearance time (DT50) values for petroleum 
hydrocarbons in fresh and marine water. An expanded, highly curated database of 
728 experimental DT50 values (181 unique hydrocarbon structures compiled from 13 
primary sources) was used to develop and validate a supervised model tree 
machine-learning model. Using relatively few parameters (6 system and 25 
structural parameters), the model demonstrated significant improvement in 
predictive performance (root mean square error = 0.26, R2  = 0.67) over existing 
QSPR models. The model also demonstrated improved accuracy of persistence (P) 
categorization (i.e., "Not P/P/vP"), with an accuracy of 96.8%, and 
false-positive and -negative categorization rates of 0.4% and 2.7%, 
respectively. This significant improvement in DT50 prediction, and subsequent 
persistence categorization, validates the need for models that integrate 
experimental design and environmental system parameters into biodegradation and 
persistence assessment. Environ Toxicol Chem 2022;41:1359-1369. © 2022 
ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Inc. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of SETAC.

© 2022 ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Inc. Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of SETAC.

DOI: 10.1002/etc.5328
PMCID: PMC9320815
PMID: 35262215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2009 Jun;12(5):490-6. doi: 
10.2174/138620709788489037.

The applications of machine learning algorithms in the modeling of estrogen-like 
chemicals.

Liu H(1), Yao X, Gramatica P.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.

Increasing concern is being shown by the scientific community, government 
regulators, and the public about endocrine-disrupting chemicals that, in the 
environment, are adversely affecting human and wildlife health through a variety 
of mechanisms, mainly estrogen receptor-mediated mechanisms of toxicity. Because 
of the large number of such chemicals in the environment, there is a great need 
for an effective means of rapidly assessing endocrine-disrupting activity in the 
toxicology assessment process. When faced with the challenging task of screening 
large libraries of molecules for biological activity, the benefits of 
computational predictive models based on quantitative structure-activity 
relationships to identify possible estrogens become immediately obvious. 
Recently, in order to improve the accuracy of prediction, some machine learning 
techniques were introduced to build more effective predictive models. In this 
review we will focus our attention on some recent advances in the use of these 
methods in modeling estrogen-like chemicals. The advantages and disadvantages of 
the machine learning algorithms used in solving this problem, the importance of 
the validation and performance assessment of the built models as well as their 
applicability domains will be discussed.

DOI: 10.2174/138620709788489037
PMID: 19519328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Aug 2;14(8):758. doi: 10.3390/ph14080758.

Should We Embed in Chemistry? A Comparison of Unsupervised Transfer Learning 
with PCA, UMAP, and VAE on Molecular Fingerprints.

Lovrić M(1)(2), Đuričić T(1)(3), Tran HTN(1), Hussain H(1)(3), Lacić E(1), 
Rasmussen MA(4)(5), Kern R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Know-Center, Inffeldgasse 13, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(2)Centre for Applied Bioanthropology, Institute for Anthropological Research, 
10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Institute of Interactive Systems and Data Science, Graz University of 
Technology, Inffeldgasse 16C, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(4)Copenhagen Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, 
University of Copenhagen, Ledreborg Alle 34, 2820 Gentofte, Denmark.
(5)Department of Food Science, University of Copenhagen, Rolighedsvej 26, 1958 
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Methods for dimensionality reduction are showing significant contributions to 
knowledge generation in high-dimensional modeling scenarios throughout many 
disciplines. By achieving a lower dimensional representation (also called 
embedding), fewer computing resources are needed in downstream machine learning 
tasks, thus leading to a faster training time, lower complexity, and statistical 
flexibility. In this work, we investigate the utility of three prominent 
unsupervised embedding techniques (principal component analysis-PCA, uniform 
manifold approximation and projection-UMAP, and variational autoencoders-VAEs) 
for solving classification tasks in the domain of toxicology. To this end, we 
compare these embedding techniques against a set of molecular fingerprint-based 
models that do not utilize additional pre-preprocessing of features. Inspired by 
the success of transfer learning in several fields, we further study the 
performance of embedders when trained on an external dataset of chemical 
compounds. To gain a better understanding of their characteristics, we evaluate 
the embedders with different embedding dimensionalities, and with different 
sizes of the external dataset. Our findings show that the recently popularized 
UMAP approach can be utilized alongside known techniques such as PCA and VAE as 
a pre-compression technique in the toxicology domain. Nevertheless, the 
generative model of VAE shows an advantage in pre-compressing the data with 
respect to classification accuracy.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14080758
PMCID: PMC8400160
PMID: 34451855

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


194. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2022 Sep;32(7):542-548. doi: 
10.1080/15376516.2022.2053623. Epub 2022 Mar 27.

Combinative ex vivo studies and in silico models ProTox-II for investigating the 
toxicity of chemicals used mainly in cosmetic products.

Banerjee P(1), Ulker OC(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate 
Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Toxicology, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Human data on remains sparse and of varying quality and reproducibility. Ex vivo 
experiments and animal experiments currently is the most preferred way to 
predict the skin sensitization approved by the regulatory agencies across the 
world. However, there is a constant need and demand to reduce animal experiments 
and provide the scope of alternative methods to animal testing. In this study, 
we have compared the predictive performance of the published computational tools 
such as ProTox-II, SuperCYPsPred with the data obtained from ex-vivo 
experiments. From the results of the retrospective analysis, it can be observed 
that the computational predictions are in agreement with the experimental 
results. The computational models used here are generative models based on 
molecular structures and machine learning algorithms and can be applied also for 
the prediction of skin sensitization. Besides prediction of the toxicity 
endpoints, the models can also provide deeper insights into the molecular 
mechanisms and adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) associated with the chemicals 
used in cosmetic products.

DOI: 10.1080/15376516.2022.2053623
PMID: 35287538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jan 2;14(1):183-92. doi: 10.1021/pr500795d. Epub 2014 Oct 
29.

Systematic proteomic approach to characterize the impacts of chemical 
interactions on protein and cytotoxicity responses to metal mixture exposures.

Ge Y(1), Bruno M, Wallace K, Leavitt S, Andrews D, Spassova MA, Xi M, Roy A, 
Haykal-Coates N, Lefew W, Swank A, Winnik WM, Chen C, Woodard J, Farraj A, 
Teichman KY, Ross JA.

Author information:
(1)National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency , 109 T. W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina 27709, United States.

Chemical interactions have posed a big challenge in toxicity characterization 
and human health risk assessment of environmental mixtures. To characterize the 
impacts of chemical interactions on protein and cytotoxicity responses to 
environmental mixtures, we established a systems biology approach integrating 
proteomics, bioinformatics, statistics, and computational toxicology to measure 
expression or phosphorylation levels of 21 critical toxicity pathway regulators 
and 445 downstream proteins in human BEAS-2B cells treated with 4 concentrations 
of nickel, 2 concentrations each of cadmium and chromium, as well as 12 defined 
binary and 8 defined ternary mixtures of these metals in vitro. Multivariate 
statistical analysis and mathematical modeling of the metal-mediated proteomic 
response patterns showed a high correlation between changes in protein 
expression or phosphorylation and cellular toxic responses to both individual 
metals and metal mixtures. Of the identified correlated proteins, only a small 
set of proteins including HIF-1α is likely to be responsible for selective 
cytotoxic responses to different metals and metals mixtures. Furthermore, 
support vector machine learning was utilized to computationally predict protein 
responses to uncharacterized metal mixtures using experimentally generated 
protein response profiles corresponding to known metal mixtures. This study 
provides a novel proteomic approach for characterization and prediction of 
toxicities of metal and other chemical mixtures.

DOI: 10.1021/pr500795d
PMID: 25285964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Toxicol In Vitro. 2019 Sep;59:204-214. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2019.01.004. Epub 2019 
Apr 24.

Prediction of the skin sensitising potential and potency of compounds via 
mechanism-based binary and ternary classification models.

Di P(1), Yin Y(1), Jiang C(1), Cai Y(1), Li W(1), Tang Y(2), Liu G(3).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China. 
Electronic address: ytang234@ecust.edu.cn.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China. 
Electronic address: gxliu@ecust.edu.cn.

Skin sensitisation, one of the most frequent forms of human immune toxicity, is 
authenticated to be a significant endpoint in the field of drug discovery and 
cosmetics. Due to the drawbacks of traditional animal testing methods, in silico 
methods have advanced to study skin sensitisation. In this study, 
mechanism-based binary and ternary classification models were constructed with a 
comprehensive data set. 1007 compounds were collected to develop five series of 
local and global models based on mechanisms. In each series, compounds were 
classified into five groups according to EC3 values, and applied as training 
sets, test sets and external validation sets. For each of the five series, 81 
binary classification models and 81 ternary classification models were acquired 
via 9 molecular fingerprints and 9 machine learning methods using a novel KNIME 
workflow. Meanwhile, the applicability domains for the best 10 models were 
figured out to certify the rationality of prediction effect. In addition, 8 
toxic substructures probably causing skin sensitisation were identified to 
speculate whether a compound is a skin sensitiser. The mechanism-based 
prediction models and the toxic substructures can be applied to predict the skin 
sensitising potential and potency of compounds.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2019.01.004
PMID: 31028860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Toxicol Pathol. 2018 Jan;46(1):14-27. doi: 10.1177/0192623317730575. Epub 2017 
Sep 22.

Sparse Supervised Classification Methods Predict and Characterize Nanomaterial 
Exposures: Independent Markers of MWCNT Exposures.

Yanamala N(1), Orandle MS(2), Kodali VK(2), Bishop L(2), Zeidler-Erdely PC(2), 
Roberts JR(3), Castranova V(4), Erdely A(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Exposure Assessment Branch, Health Effects Laboratory Division, National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(2)2 Pathology & Physiology Research Branch, Health Effects Laboratory Division, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, West 
Virginia, USA.
(3)3 Allergy and Clinical Immunology Branch, Health Effects Laboratory Division, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, West 
Virginia, USA.
(4)4 Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

Recent experimental evidence indicates significant pulmonary toxicity of 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), such as inflammation, interstitial 
fibrosis, granuloma formation, and carcinogenicity. Although numerous studies 
explored the adverse potential of various CNTs, their comparability is often 
limited. This is due to differences in administered dose, physicochemical 
characteristics, exposure methods, and end points monitored. Here, we addressed 
the problem through sparse classification method, a supervised machine learning 
approach that can reduce the noise contained in redundant variables for 
discriminating among MWCNT-exposed and MWCNT-unexposed groups. A panel of 
proteins measured from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) samples was used to 
predict exposure to various MWCNT and determine markers that are attributable to 
MWCNT exposure and toxicity in mice. Using sparse support vector machine-based 
classification technique, we identified a small subset of proteins clearly 
distinguishing each exposure. Macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC/CCL22), in 
particular, was associated with various MWCNT exposures and was independent of 
exposure method employed, that is, oropharyngeal aspiration versus inhalation 
exposure. Sustained expression of some of the selected protein markers 
identified also suggests their potential role in MWCNT-induced toxicity and 
proposes hypotheses for future mechanistic studies. Such approaches can be used 
more broadly for nanomaterial risk profiling studies to evaluate decisions 
related to dose/time-response relationships that could delineate experimental 
variables from exposure markers.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623317730575
PMID: 28934917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1981:383-396. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9420-5_26.

In Silico Approaches to Predict Drug-Transporter Interaction Profiles: Data 
Mining, Model Generation, and Link to Cholestasis.

Jain S(1), Ecker GF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 
14, Vienna, 1090, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 
14, Vienna, 1090, Austria. gerhard.f.ecker@univie.ac.at.

Transport proteins play a crucial role in drug distribution, disposition, and 
clearance by mediating cellular drug influx and efflux. Inhibition of these 
transporters may lead to drug-drug interactions or even drug-induced liver 
injury, such as cholestasis, which comprises a major challenge in drug 
development process. Thus, computer-based (in silico) models that can predict 
the pharmacological and toxicological profiles of these small molecules with 
respect to liver transporters may help in the early prioritization of compounds 
and hence may lower the high attrition rates. In this chapter, we provide a 
protocol for in silico prediction of cholestasis by generating validated 
predictive models. In addition to the two-dimensional molecular descriptors, we 
include transporter inhibition predictions as descriptors and evaluate the 
influence of the same on the performance of the cholestasis models.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9420-5_26
PMID: 31016669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Curr Protoc Chem Biol. 2019 Sep;11(3):e73. doi: 10.1002/cpch.73.

Elucidating Compound Mechanism of Action and Predicting Cytotoxicity Using 
Machine Learning Approaches, Taking Prediction Confidence into Account.

Drakakis G(1), Cortés-Ciriano I(1), Alexander-Dann B(1), Bender A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The modes of action (MoAs) of drugs frequently are unknown, because many are 
small molecules initially identified from phenotypic screens, giving rise to the 
need to elucidate their MoAs. In addition, the high attrition rate for candidate 
drugs in preclinical studies due to intolerable toxicity has motivated the 
development of computational approaches to predict drug candidate (cyto)toxicity 
as early as possible in the drug-discovery process. Here, we provide detailed 
instructions for capitalizing on bioactivity predictions to elucidate the MoAs 
of small molecules and infer their underlying phenotypic effects. We illustrate 
how these predictions can be used to infer the underlying antidepressive effects 
of marketed drugs. We also provide the necessary functionalities to model 
cytotoxicity data using single and ensemble machine-learning algorithms. 
Finally, we give detailed instructions on how to calculate confidence intervals 
for individual predictions using the conformal prediction framework. © 2019 by 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cpch.73
PMID: 31483099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Environ Int. 2022 Nov;169:107536. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107536. Epub 2022 
Sep 20.

Predicting bioconcentration factor and estrogen receptor bioactivity of 
bisphenol a and its analogues in adult zebrafish by directed message passing 
neural networks.

Yang L(1), Chen P(2), He K(1), Wang R(3), Chen G(4), Shan G(5), Zhu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria, Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300350, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria, Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300350, China; College of Oceanography, Hohai University, Nanjing 
210098, China.
(3)College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Hangzhou Institute for 
Advanced Study, UCAS, Hangzhou 330106, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria, Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300350, China. Electronic address: yunongshan@nankai.edu.cn.

The bioconcentration factor (BCF) is a key parameter for bioavailability 
assessment of environmental pollutants in regulatory frameworks. The comparative 
toxicology and mechanism of action of congeners are also of concern. However, 
there are limitations to acquire them by conducting field and laboratory 
experiments while machinelearning is emerging as a promising predictive tool to 
fill the gap. In this study, the Direct Message Passing Neural Network (DMPNN) 
was applied to predict logBCFs of bisphenol A (BPA) and its four analogues 
(bisphenol AF (BPAF), bisphenol B (BPB), bisphenol F (BPF) and bisphenol S 
(BPS)). For the test set, the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) and mean 
square error (MSE) were 0.85 and 0.52 respectively, suggesting a good predictive 
performance. The predicted logBCFs values by the DMPNN ranging from 0.35 (BPS) 
to 2.14 (BPAF) coincided well with those by the classical EPI Suite (BCFBAF 
model). Besides, estrogen receptor α (ERα) bioactivity of these bisphenols was 
also predicted well by the DMPNN, with a probability of 97.0 % (BPB) to 99.7 % 
(BPAF), which was validated by the extent of vitellogenin (VTG) induction in 
male zebrafish as a biomarker except BPS. Thus, with little need for expert 
knowledge, DMPNN is confirmed to be a useful tool to accurately predict logBCF 
and screen for estrogenic activity from molecular structures. Moreover, a gender 
difference was noted in the changes of three endpoints (logBCF, ER binding 
affinity and VTG levels), the rank order of which was 
BPAF > BPB > BPA > BPF > BPS consistently, and abnormal amino acid metabolism is 
featured as an omics signature of abnormal hormone protein expression.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2022.107536
PMID: 36152365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


201. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2021 Oct 15. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13975. Online ahead of print.

Synthesis, QSAR modeling, and molecular docking of novel fused 7-deazaxanthine 
derivatives as adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists.

Muzychka LV(1), Verves EV(1)(2), Yaremchuk IO(1), Zinchenko AM(1), Shishkina 
SV(3), Semenyuta IV(4), Hodyna DM(4), Metelytsia LO(4), Kovalishyn V(4), Smolii 
OB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry of Natural Compounds, V.P. Kukhar Institute of 
Bioorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(2)Enamine Ltd, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(3)Department of X-ray Diffraction Studies and Quantum Chemistry, STC "Institute 
for Single Crystals", NAS of Ukraine, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
(4)Department of Medical and Biological Researches, V.P. Kukhar Institute of 
Bioorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Predictive QSAR models for the search of new adenosine A2A receptor antagonists 
were developed by using OCHEM platform. The predictive ability of the regression 
models has coefficient of determination q2  = 0.65-0.71 with cross-validation 
and independent test set. The inhibition activities of novel fused 
7-deazaxanthine compounds were predicted by the developed QSAR models. A 
preparative method for the synthesis of 
pyrimido[5',4':4,5]pyrrolo[1,2-a][1,4]diazepine derivatives was developed, and 
11 new adenosine A2A receptor antagonists were obtained. Preliminary 
investigations into the toxicology of fused 7-deazaxanthine compounds toward 
commonly used model organism to assess toxicity invertebrate cladoceran D. magna 
were also described.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13975
PMID: 34651417


202. J Cheminform. 2020 Apr 14;12(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s13321-020-00422-x.

KnowTox: pipeline and case study for confident prediction of potential toxic 
effects of compounds in early phases of development.

Morger A(1), Mathea M(2), Achenbach JH(2), Wolf A(2), Buesen R(2), Schleifer 
KJ(2), Landsiedel R(2), Volkamer A(3).

Author information:
(1)In Silico Toxicology and Structural Bioinformatics, Institute of Physiology, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Berlin, Germany.
(2)BASF SE, 67056, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
(3)In Silico Toxicology and Structural Bioinformatics, Institute of Physiology, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Berlin, Germany. 
andrea.volkamer@charite.de.

Risk assessment of newly synthesised chemicals is a prerequisite for regulatory 
approval. In this context, in silico methods have great potential to reduce 
time, cost, and ultimately animal testing as they make use of the ever-growing 
amount of available toxicity data. Here, KnowTox is presented, a novel pipeline 
that combines three different in silico toxicology approaches to allow for 
confident prediction of potentially toxic effects of query compounds, i.e. 
machine learning models for 88 endpoints, alerts for 919 toxic substructures, 
and computational support for read-across. It is mainly based on the ToxCast 
dataset, containing after preprocessing a sparse matrix of 7912 compounds tested 
against 985 endpoints. When applying machine learning models, applicability and 
reliability of predictions for new chemicals are of utmost importance. 
Therefore, first, the conformal prediction technique was deployed, comprising an 
additional calibration step and per definition creating internally valid 
predictors at a given significance level. Second, to further improve validity 
and information efficiency, two adaptations are suggested, exemplified at the 
androgen receptor antagonism endpoint. An absolute increase in validity of 23% 
on the in-house dataset of 534 compounds could be achieved by introducing 
KNNRegressor normalisation. This increase in validity comes at the cost of 
efficiency, which could again be improved by 20% for the initial ToxCast model 
by balancing the dataset during model training. Finally, the value of the 
developed pipeline for risk assessment is discussed using two in-house triazole 
molecules. Compared to a single toxicity prediction method, complementing the 
outputs of different approaches can have a higher impact on guiding toxicity 
testing and de-selecting most likely harmful development-candidate compounds 
early in the development process.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-020-00422-x
PMCID: PMC7157991
PMID: 33431007

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. MM, JHA, AW, KJS, RB and RL are employees of BASF SE, a company 
developing and marketing fungicides.


203. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Oct 2;9:1072. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01072. eCollection 
2018.

A Qualitative Modeling Approach for Whole Genome Prediction Using 
High-Throughput Toxicogenomics Data and Pathway-Based Validation.

Haider S(1), Black MB(1), Parks BB(1), Foley B(1), Wetmore BA(1), Andersen 
ME(1), Clewell RA(1), Mansouri K(1), McMullen PD(1).

Author information:
(1)ScitoVation, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States.

Efficient high-throughput transcriptomics (HTT) tools promise inexpensive, rapid 
assessment of possible biological consequences of human and environmental 
exposures to tens of thousands of chemicals in commerce. HTT systems have used 
relatively small sets of gene expression measurements coupled with mathematical 
prediction methods to estimate genome-wide gene expression and are often trained 
and validated using pharmaceutical compounds. It is unclear whether these 
training sets are suitable for general toxicity testing applications and the 
more diverse chemical space represented by commercial chemicals and 
environmental contaminants. In this work, we built predictive computational 
models that inferred whole genome transcriptional profiles from a smaller sample 
of surrogate genes. The model was trained and validated using a large scale 
toxicogenomics database with gene expression data from exposure to heterogeneous 
chemicals from a wide range of classes (the Open TG-GATEs data base). The method 
of predictor selection was designed to allow high fidelity gene prediction from 
any pre-existing gene expression data set, regardless of animal species or data 
measurement platform. Predictive qualitative models were developed with this 
TG-GATES data that contained gene expression data of human primary hepatocytes 
with over 941 samples covering 158 compounds. A sequential forward search-based 
greedy algorithm, combining different fitting approaches and machine learning 
techniques, was used to find an optimal set of surrogate genes that predicted 
differential expression changes of the remaining genome. We then used pathway 
enrichment of up-regulated and down-regulated genes to assess the ability of a 
limited gene set to determine relevant patterns of tissue response. In addition, 
we compared prediction performance using the surrogate genes found from our 
greedy algorithm (referred to as the SV2000) with the landmark genes provided by 
existing technologies such as L1000 (Genometry) and S1500 (Tox21), finding 
better predictive performance for the SV2000. The ability of these predictive 
algorithms to predict pathway level responses is a positive step toward 
incorporating mode of action (MOA) analysis into the high throughput 
prioritization and testing of the large number of chemicals in need of safety 
evaluation.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01072
PMCID: PMC6176017
PMID: 30333746


204. Toxicol Sci. 2020 Jan 1;173(1):32-40. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz214.

Deciphering Adverse Outcome Pathway Network Linked to Bisphenol F Using Text 
Mining and Systems Toxicology Approaches.

Rugard M(1), Coumoul X(1), Carvaillo JC(1), Barouki R(1), Audouze K(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Inserm UMR S-1124, 75006 Paris, France.

Bisphenol F (BPF) is one of several Bisphenol A (BPA) substituents that is 
increasingly used in manufacturing industry leading to detectable human 
exposure. Whereas a large number of studies have been devoted to decipher BPA 
effects, much less is known about its substituents. To support decision making 
on BPF's safety, we have developed a new computational approach to rapidly 
explore the available data on its toxicological effects, combining text mining 
and integrative systems biology, and aiming at connecting BPF to adverse outcome 
pathways (AOPs). We first extracted from different databases BPF-protein 
associations that were expanded to protein complexes using protein-protein 
interaction datasets. Over-representation analysis of the protein complexes 
allowed to identify the most relevant biological pathways putatively targeted by 
BPF. Then, automatic screening of scientific abstracts from literature using the 
text mining tool, AOP-helpFinder, combined with data integration from various 
sources (AOP-wiki, CompTox, etc.) and manual curation allowed us to link BPF to 
AOP events. Finally, we combined all the information gathered through those 
analyses and built a comprehensive complex framework linking BPF to an AOP 
network including, as adverse outcomes, various types of cancers such as breast 
and thyroid malignancies. These results which integrate different types of data 
can support regulatory assessment of the BPA substituent, BPF, and trigger new 
epidemiological and experimental studies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz214
PMCID: PMC6944215
PMID: 31596483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2015 Nov;407(27):8253-61. doi: 10.1007/s00216-015-9004-8. 
Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Simultaneous multiplexed quantification of caffeine and its major metabolites 
theobromine and paraxanthine using surface-enhanced Raman scattering.

Alharbi O(1), Xu Y(1), Goodacre R(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.
(2)School of Chemistry, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK. 
roy.goodacre@manchester.ac.uk.

Accurate quantitative measurement of drugs and their metabolites is important as 
this can be used to establish long-term abuse of illicit materials as well as 
establish accurate drug dosing for legal therapeutics. However, the levels of 
drugs and xenometabolites found in human body fluids necessitate methods that 
are highly sensitive as well as reproducible with the potential for portability. 
Raman spectroscopy does offer excellent reproducibility, portability and 
chemical specificity, but unfortunately, the Raman effect is generally too weak 
unless it is enhanced. We therefore developed surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
(SERS) and combined it with the powerful machine learning technique of 
artificial neural networks to enable rapid quantification of caffeine and its 
two major metabolites theobromine and paraxanthine. We established a three-way 
mixture analysis from 10(-5) to 10(-7) mol/dm(3), and excellent predictions were 
generated for all three analytes in tertiary mixtures. The range we selected 
reflects the levels found in human body fluids, and the typical errors for our 
portable SERS analysis were 1.7 × 10(-6) mol/dm(3) for caffeine, 
8.8 × 10(-7) mol/dm(3) for theobromine and 9.6 × 10(-7) mol/dm(3) for 
paraxanthine. We believe this demonstrates the exciting prospect of using SERS 
for the quantitative analysis of multiple analytes simultaneously without 
recourse to lengthy and time-consuming chromatography, a method that often has 
to be combined with mass spectrometry.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-015-9004-8
PMCID: PMC4604501
PMID: 26345445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2022 Jun 1;444:116020. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2022.116020. 
Epub 2022 Apr 14.

Titanium dioxide nanoparticles induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) related 
changes of metabolomics signatures in human normal bronchial epithelial 
(BEAS-2B) cells.

Zhang J(1), Shi J(1), Han S(1), Zheng P(1), Chen Z(2), Jia G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health Sciences, School of 
Public Health, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China.
(2)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health Sciences, School of 
Public Health, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address: 
zhangjianchen@pku.edu.cn.

Titanium dioxide often enters the respiratory tract in the form of nano-dust in 
occupational sites. Metabolomics may be a promising method for studying the 
toxicology of nano titanium dioxide. The intention of this study was to explore 
the possible impact of titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) on the 
metabolomics signatures of human normal bronchial epithelial (BEAS-2B) cells and 
to search for investigate the role of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this 
study, BEAS-2B cells were treated by TiO2 NPs (0, 25, 50 and 100 μg/mL) for 
48 h. The metabolites extracted from BEAS-2B cells were determined by untargeted 
metabolomics technique, and the differential metabolites and metabolic pathways 
were discovered by using multivariate analysis. Intracellular ROS was detected 
by DCFH-DA probe and flow cytometry method. Machine learning was used to explore 
the relationship between ROS and metabolomics changes. Totally, seventy-six 
differential metabolites and the steroid biosynthesis pathway of BEAS-2B cells 
were observed after treatment of TiO2 NPs. Lipid and lipid-like metabolites were 
the most significant classes among the metabolite products induced by TiO2 NPs. 
TiO2 NPs resulted in a dose-dependent increase in intracellular ROS levels, and 
correlated with most of the differential metabolites. In conclusion, TiO2 NPs 
increased the level of the oxidative stress, which could contribute to the 
altered signature represented by lipid metabolism in BEAS-2B cells.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2022.116020
PMID: 35430233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 1;19(10):1194-200. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg099.

Putting the Predictive Toxicology Challenge into perspective: reflections on the 
results.

Benigni R(1), Giuliani A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Toxicology and Ecotoxicology, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanita, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. rbenigni@iss.it

MOTIVATION: Chemical carcinogenicity is of primary interest, because it drives 
much of the current regulatory actions regarding new and existing chemicals, and 
its experimental determination involves time-consuming and expensive animal 
testing. Both academia and private companies are actively trying to develop SAR 
and QSAR models. This paper reviews the new Predictive Toxicology Challenge 
(PTC) results, by putting them into the context of previous attempts.
RESULTS: A marked dependency of the prediction ability of the different 
algorithms on the training sets was observed, pointing to a still insufficient 
coverage of the chemical carcinogens 'universe'. A theoretical treatment of the 
possible developments of the Artificial Intelligence approaches is sketched.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg099
PMID: 12835261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biology (Basel). 2022 Aug 21;11(8):1243. doi: 10.3390/biology11081243.

Using DeepLabCut as a Real-Time and Markerless Tool for Cardiac Physiology 
Assessment in Zebrafish.

Suryanto ME(1)(2), Saputra F(1)(2), Kurnia KA(1)(2), Vasquez RD(3), Roldan 
MJM(4), Chen KH(5), Huang JC(5), Hsiao CD(1)(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taoyuan 320314, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Bioscience Technology, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taoyuan 
320314, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Research Center for Natural and Applied Sciences, 
University of Santo Tomas, Manila 1008, Philippines.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, The Graduate School, University of Santo Tomas, Manila 
1008, Philippines.
(5)Department of Applied Chemistry, National Pingtung University, Pingtung 
90003, Taiwan.
(6)Center for Nanotechnology, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taoyuan 320314, 
Taiwan.
(7)Research Center for Aquatic Toxicology and Pharmacology, Chung Yuan Christian 
University, Taoyuan 320314, Taiwan.

DeepLabCut (DLC) is a deep learning-based tool initially invented for markerless 
pose estimation in mammals. In this study, we explored the possibility of 
adopting this tool for conducting markerless cardiac physiology assessment in an 
important aquatic toxicology model of zebrafish (Danio rerio). Initially, 
high-definition videography was applied to capture heartbeat information at a 
frame rate of 30 frames per second (fps). Next, 20 videos from different 
individuals were used to perform convolutional neural network training by 
labeling the heart chamber (ventricle) with eight landmarks. Using Residual 
Network (ResNet) 152, a neural network with 152 convolutional neural network 
layers with 500,000 iterations, we successfully obtained a trained model that 
can track the heart chamber in a real-time manner. Later, we validated DLC 
performance with the previously published ImageJ Time Series Analysis (TSA) and 
Kymograph (KYM) methods. We also evaluated DLC performance by challenging 
experimental animals with ethanol and ponatinib to induce cardiac abnormality 
and heartbeat irregularity. The results showed that DLC is more accurate than 
the TSA method in several parameters tested. The DLC-trained model also detected 
the ventricle of zebrafish embryos even in the occurrence of heart 
abnormalities, such as pericardial edema. We believe that this tool is 
beneficial for research studies, especially for cardiac physiology assessment in 
zebrafish embryos.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11081243
PMCID: PMC9405297
PMID: 36009871

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.


209. Toxicol Sci. 2020 Aug 1;176(2):423-432. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfaa068.

The GARDpotency Assay for Potency-Associated Subclassification of Chemical Skin 
Sensitizers-Rationale, Method Development, and Ring Trial Results of Predictive 
Performance and Reproducibility.

Gradin R(1), Johansson A(1), Forreryd A(1), Aaltonen E(1), Jerre A(1), Larne 
O(1), Mattson U(1), Johansson H(1).

Author information:
(1)SenzaGen AB, 22381 Lund, Sweden.

Proactive identification and characterization of hazards attributable to 
chemicals are central aspects of risk assessments. Current legislations and 
trends in predictive toxicology advocate a transition from in vivo methods to 
nonanimal alternatives. For skin sensitization assessment, several OECD 
validated alternatives exist for hazard identification, but nonanimal methods 
capable of accurately characterizing the risks associated with sensitizing 
potency are still lacking. The GARD (Genomic Allergen Rapid Detection) platform 
utilizes exposure-induced gene expression profiles of a dendritic-like cell line 
in combination with machine learning to provide hazard classifications for 
different immunotoxicity endpoints. Recently, a novel genomic biomarker 
signature displaying promising potency-associated discrimination between weak 
and strong skin sensitizers was proposed. Here, we present the adaptation of the 
defined biomarker signature on a gene expression analysis platform suited for 
routine acquisition, confirm the validity of the proposed biomarkers, and define 
the GARDpotency assay for prediction of skin sensitizer potency. The performance 
of GARDpotency was validated in a blinded ring trial, in accordance with OECD 
guidance documents. The cumulative accuracy was estimated to 88.0% across 3 
laboratories and 9 independent experiments. The within-laboratory 
reproducibility measures ranged between 62.5% and 88.9%, and the 
between-laboratory reproducibility was estimated to 61.1%. Currently, no direct 
or systematic cause for the observed inconsistencies between the laboratories 
has been identified. Further investigations into the sources of introduced 
variability will potentially allow for increased reproducibility. In conclusion, 
the in vitro GARDpotency assay constitutes a step forward for development of 
nonanimal alternatives for hazard characterization of skin sensitizers.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfaa068
PMCID: PMC7416325
PMID: 32421796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Sep;129(1):57-73. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs201. Epub 2012 Jun 
13.

Machine learning analysis of the relationship between changes in immunological 
parameters and changes in resistance to Listeria monocytogenes: a new approach 
for risk assessment and systems immunology.

Liu Z(1), Yuan C, Pruett SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Bagley College of 
Engineering, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 39762, USA.

No method has been reported to predict, even approximately, the impact of 
mild-to-moderate changes in several immunological parameters on resistance to 
infection. The ability to make such predictions would be useful in risk 
assessment. In addition, equations that predict host resistance on the basis of 
changes in components of a complex biological system (the immune system) would 
fulfill one of the major goals of systems biology. In this study, multiple 
machine learning classification methods were used to predict the effects of a 
series of drugs and chemicals on host resistance to Listeria monocytogenes in 
mice on the basis of changes in several holistic immunological parameters. A 
data set produced under the sponsorship of the National Toxicology Program (NTP) 
was used in this study. The NTP data set was found to have a high percentage of 
missing data and to be noisy (probably due to the intrinsically stochastic 
nature of immune responses). Data preprocessing steps were used to mitigate 
these problems. In evaluating the machine learning classifiers, we first 
randomly partitioned the NTP data set into 10 subsets. Each time, we used nine 
subsets of the data to train the machine learning classifiers, and the remaining 
single subset to predict outcomes with regard to host resistance. This process 
was repeated until all 10 combinations of the 9-1 split of the subsets have been 
tested. The best of the classifiers predicted host resistance outcome correctly 
for 94.7% of cases, a result which indicates it is possible to identify 
mathematical expressions that will be useful for risk assessment and to 
establish a basis for systems immunology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs201
PMCID: PMC3888231
PMID: 22696237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Mar 8;19(Suppl 2):48. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2035-3.

Ensemble of rankers for efficient gene signature extraction in smoke exposure 
classification.

Giordano M(1), Tripathi KP(2), Guarracino MR(2).

Author information:
(1)High Performance Computing and Networking Institute (ICAR), National Council 
of Research (CNR), Naples, Italy. maurizio.giordano@cnr.it.
(2)High Performance Computing and Networking Institute (ICAR), National Council 
of Research (CNR), Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: System toxicology aims at understanding the mechanisms used by 
biological systems to respond to toxicants. Such understanding can be leveraged 
to assess the risk of chemicals, drugs, and consumer products in living 
organisms. In system toxicology, machine learning techniques and methodologies 
are applied to develop prediction models for classification of toxicant exposure 
of biological systems. Gene expression data (RNA/DNA microarray) are often used 
to develop such prediction models.
RESULTS: The outcome of the present work is an experimental methodology to 
develop prediction models, based on robust gene signatures, for the 
classification of cigarette smoke exposure and cessation in humans. It is a 
result of the participation in the recent sbv IMPROVER SysTox Computational 
Challenge. By merging different gene selection techniques, we obtain robust gene 
signatures and we investigate prediction capabilities of different off-the-shelf 
machine learning techniques, such as artificial neural networks, linear models 
and support vector machines. We also predict six novel genes in our signature, 
and firmly believe these genes have to be further investigated as biomarkers for 
tobacco smoking exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed methodology provides gene signatures with top-ranked 
performances in the prediction of the investigated classification methods, as 
well as new discoveries in genetic signatures for bio-markers of the smoke 
exposure of humans.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2035-3
PMCID: PMC5850943
PMID: 29536823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Datasets used in the current work are all from secondary sources, where primary 
ethics approval had been obtained for data acquisition. Implementations of 
algorithms and mathematical methods used in the current work are all available 
as opensource software. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


212. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;59(1):111-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.yrtph.2010.09.012. Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Computational analysis for hepatic safety signals of constituents present in 
botanical extracts widely used by women in the United States for treatment of 
menopausal symptoms.

Wang YJ(1), Dou J, Cross KP, Valerio LG Jr.

Author information:
(1)Office of Pharmaceutical Science, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, US 
Food and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 
20993-0002, USA.

Black cohosh, red clover, hops, and chasteberry are botanicals commonly used to 
alleviate menopausal symptoms in the US, and are examined in this study as part 
of a FDA Office of Women's Health research collaboration to expand knowledge on 
the safety of these botanical products. Computational approaches using classic 
(quantitative) structure-activity relationships ((Q)SAR), probabilistic 
reasoning, machine learning methods, and human expert rule-based systems were 
employed to deliver human hepatobiliary adverse effect predictions. The 
objective is to profile and analyze constituents that are alerting for the human 
hepatobiliary adverse effects. Computational analysis of positively predicted 
constituents showed that common structural features contributing to the 
hepatobiliary adverse effect predictions contain phenolic, flavone, isoflavone, 
glucoside conjugated flavone and isoflavone, and 4-hydroxyacetophenone 
structures. Specifically, protocatechuic acid from black cohosh, benzofuran and 
4-vinylphenol from chasteberry, and xanthohumol I from hops were botanical 
constituents predicted positive for liver toxicity endpoints and were also 
confirmed with literature findings. However, comparison between the estimated 
human exposure to these botanical constituents and the LOAEL and NOAEL in 
published animal liver toxicology studies for these constituents demonstrated 
varying margins of safety. This study will serve as regulatory decision support 
information for regulators at the FDA to help with the process of prioritizing 
chemicals for testing.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2010.09.012
PMID: 20920542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jul 3;45(W1):W484-W489. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx462.

LimTox: a web tool for applied text mining of adverse event and toxicity 
associations of compounds, drugs and genes.

Cañada A(1), Capella-Gutierrez S(1), Rabal O(2), Oyarzabal J(2), Valencia 
A(3)(4)(5), Krallinger M(6).

Author information:
(1)Spanish National Bioinformatics Institute Unit, Structural Biology and 
BioComputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 
28029, Spain.
(2)Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain.
(3)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Joint BSC-CRG-IRB, Research Program in 
Computational Biology, BSC-CRG-IRB, Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(4)Life Science Department, Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC-CNS), 08034 
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(6)Biological Text Mining Unit, Structural Biology and BioComputing Programme, 
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28029, Spain.

A considerable effort has been devoted to retrieve systematically information 
for genes and proteins as well as relationships between them. Despite the 
importance of chemical compounds and drugs as a central bio-entity in 
pharmacological and biological research, only a limited number of freely 
available chemical text-mining/search engine technologies are currently 
accessible. Here we present LimTox (Literature Mining for Toxicology), a 
web-based online biomedical search tool with special focus on adverse 
hepatobiliary reactions. It integrates a range of text mining, named entity 
recognition and information extraction components. LimTox relies on 
machine-learning, rule-based, pattern-based and term lookup strategies. This 
system processes scientific abstracts, a set of full text articles and medical 
agency assessment reports. Although the main focus of LimTox is on adverse liver 
events, it enables also basic searches for other organ level toxicity 
associations (nephrotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, thyrotoxicity and 
phospholipidosis). This tool supports specialized search queries for: chemical 
compounds/drugs, genes (with additional emphasis on key enzymes in drug 
metabolism, namely P450 cytochromes-CYPs) and biochemical liver markers. The 
LimTox website is free and open to all users and there is no login requirement. 
LimTox can be accessed at: http://limtox.bioinfo.cnio.es.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx462
PMCID: PMC5570141
PMID: 28531339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Nov;108(11):1029-33. doi: 10.1289/ehp.001081029.

Data quality in predictive toxicology: identification of chemical structures and 
calculation of chemical properties.

Helma C(1), Kramer S, Pfahringer B, Gottmann E.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Computer Science, University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 
helma@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

Every technique for toxicity prediction and for the detection of 
structure-activity relationships relies on the accurate estimation and 
representation of chemical and toxicologic properties. In this paper we discuss 
the potential sources of errors associated with the identification of compounds, 
the representation of their structures, and the calculation of chemical 
descriptors. It is based on a case study where machine learning techniques were 
applied to data from noncongeneric compounds and a complex toxicologic end point 
(carcinogenicity). We propose methods applicable to the routine quality control 
of large chemical datasets, but our main intention is to raise awareness about 
this topic and to open a discussion about quality assurance in predictive 
toxicology. The accuracy and reproducibility of toxicity data will be reported 
in another paper.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.001081029
PMCID: PMC1240158
PMID: 11102292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Altern Lab Anim. 2007 Mar;35(1):25-32. doi: 10.1177/026119290703500119.

A comparative study of machine learning algorithms applied to predictive 
toxicology data mining.

Neagu DC(1), Guo G, Trundle PR, Cronin MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK. 
D.Neagu@bradford.ac.uk

This paper reports results of a comparative study of widely used machine 
learning algorithms applied to predictive toxicology data mining. The machine 
learning algorithms involved were chosen in terms of their representability and 
diversity, and were extensively evaluated with seven toxicity data sets which 
were taken from real-world applications. Some results based on visual analysis 
of the correlations of different descriptors to the class values of chemical 
compounds, and on the relationships of the range of chosen descriptors to the 
performance of machine learning algorithms, are emphasised from our experiments. 
Some interesting findings relating to the data and the quality of the models are 
presented--for example, that no specific algorithm appears best for all seven 
toxicity data sets, and that up to five descriptors are sufficient for creating 
classification models for each toxicity data set with good accuracy. We suggest 
that, for a specific data set, model accuracy is affected by the feature 
selection method and model development technique. Models built with too many or 
too few descriptors are undesirable, and finding the optimal feature subset 
appears at least as important as selecting appropriate algorithms with which to 
build a final model.

DOI: 10.1177/026119290703500119
PMID: 17411348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biol Pharm Bull. 2022 Sep 28. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b22-00502. Online ahead of print.

Updated in Silico Prediction Methods for Fractions Absorbed and Key Input 
Parameters of 355 Disparate Chemicals for Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic 
Models for Time-Dependent Plasma Concentrations after Virtual Oral Doses in 
Humans.

Adachi K(1), Shimizu M(1), Yamazaki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Showa Pharmaceutical University.

Human metabolic profiles for substances such as toxic food-derived compounds are 
usually allometrically extrapolated from traditionally determined in vivo rat 
concentration profiles. To evaluate internal exposures in humans without any 
reference to experimental data, physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 
modeling could be used if the model input parameters could be estimated in 
silico. This approach would simplify the use of PBPK models for forward 
dosimetry after oral doses. In this study, the in silico estimation of input 
parameters for PBPK models (i.e., fraction absorbed × intestinal availability, 
absorption rate constants, and volumes of the systemic circulation) was updated 
for an panel of 355 chemicals (212 previously analyzed and 143 additional 
substances) using a light gradient boosting machine learning algorithms 
(LightGBM) based on between 11 and 29 in silico-calculated chemical descriptors. 
Simplified human PBPK models were then used to calculate virtual maximum plasma 
concentrations (Cmax) and areas under the concentration-time curve (AUC) based 
on two sets of input parameters, i.e., traditionally derived values from in vivo 
data and those calculated in silico using the current updated systems. Both sets 
of Cmax and AUC data were well correlated (r = 0.87 and r = 0.73, respectively; 
p < 0.01, n = 355). Therefore, input parameters for human PBPK models for a 
diverse range of compounds could be successfully estimated using chemical 
descriptors and in silico tools. This approach to pharmacokinetic modeling has 
potential for application in computational toxicology and in the clinical 
setting for assessing the potential risk of general chemicals.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b22-00502
PMID: 36171106


217. Chemosphere. 2018 Nov;210:312-319. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.07.023. Epub 
2018 Jul 6.

A combination of ternary classification models and reporter gene assays for the 
comprehensive thyroid hormone disruption profiles of 209 polychlorinated 
biphenyls.

Bai X(1), Yan L(2), Ji C(2), Zhang Q(2), Dong X(3), Chen A(4), Zhao M(5).

Author information:
(1)Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, 310006, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology for Industrial Pollution Control of 
Zhejiang Province, College of Environment, Zhejiang University of Technology, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310032, China.
(3)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
310058, China. Electronic address: dongxw@zju.edu.cn.
(4)College of Information Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, 310018, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology for Industrial Pollution Control of 
Zhejiang Province, College of Environment, Zhejiang University of Technology, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310032, China. Electronic address: zhaomr@zjut.edu.cn.

Computational toxicology is widely applied to screen tens and thousands of 
potential environmental endocrine disruptors (EDCs) for its great efficiency and 
rapid evaluation in recent years. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) with 209 
congeners have not been comprehensively tested for their ability to interact 
with the thyroid receptor (TR), which is one of the most extensively studied 
targets related to the effects of EDCs. In this study, we aimed to determine the 
thyroid-disrupting mechanisms of 209 PCBs through the combination of a novel 
computational ternary classification model and luciferase reporter gene assay. 
The reporter gene assay was performed to examine the hormone activities of 22 
PCBs via TR to classify their profiles as agonistic, antagonistic or inactive. 
Thus, six agonists, eleven antagonists and seven inactive chemicals against TR 
were identified in in vitro assays. Then, six relevant variables, including 
molecular structural descriptors and molecular docking scores, were selected for 
describing compounds. Machine learning methods (i.e., linear discriminant 
analysis (LDA) and support vector machines (SVM)) were used to build 
classification models. The optimal model was obtained by using SVM, with an 
accuracy of 88.24% in the training set, 80.0% in the test set and 75.0% in 
10-fold cross-validation. The remaining 187 PCB congeners' hormone activities 
were predicted using the obtained models. Out of these PCBs, the SVM model 
predicted 38 agonists and 81 antagonists. The findings revealed that higher 
chlorinated PCBs tended to have TR-antagonistic activities, whereas lower 
chlorinated PCBs were agonists. This study provided a reference for further 
exploring PCBs' thyroid effect.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.07.023
PMID: 30005353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2018 Jul;48(4):549-552.

Diversity, Cultural Competence, and Multiculturalism: A Stronghold for the 
Future of Biotechnology.

Sergi C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)National "111" Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, 
Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, Hubei sergi@ualberta.ca.
(2)Tianyou Hospital, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 
China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton.
(4)Stollery Children's Hospital, Canada.

PMID: 30143502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. SAR QSAR Environ Res. 2001;12(6):515-28. doi: 10.1080/10629360108039832.

QSAR modeling of large heterogeneous sets of molecules.

Devillers J(1).

Author information:
(1)CTIS, Rillieux La Pape, France. j.devillers@ctis.fr

In aquatic toxicology, QSAR models are generally designed for chemicals 
presenting the same mode of toxic action. Their proper use provides good 
simulation results. Problems arise when the mechanism of toxicity of a chemical 
is not clearly identified. Indeed, in that case, the inappropriate application 
of a specific QSAR model can lead to a dramatic error in the toxicity 
estimation. With the advent of powerful computers and easy access to them, and 
the introduction of soft modeling and artificial intelligence in SAR and QSAR, 
radically different models, designed from large noncongeneric sets of chemicals 
have been proposed. Some of these new QSAR models are reviewed and their 
originality, advantages, and limitations are stressed.

DOI: 10.1080/10629360108039832
PMID: 11813803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Anal Toxicol. 1990 Sep-Oct;14(5):280-4. doi: 10.1093/jat/14.5.280.

Automated rule-based decision systems in forensic toxicology using expert 
knowledge: basic principles and practical applications.

Cechner RL(1), Sutheimer CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106.

This paper presents the basic principles and practical benefits of the 
application of expert systems (ES) and artificial intelligence (AI) to problem 
solving in forensic toxicology. We acknowledge the complexity and elegance of 
the theoretical substance and program algorithms of existing work in these 
disciplines, while simultaneously observing that many presentations of this 
material cloak the essential facts and concepts in unnecessary jargon and 
hyperbole. We attempt to remove the cloak without misrepresenting or 
oversimplifying the underlying structures. We first present a summary of the 
history, basic functions, technical fundamentals, and typical applications in 
three major categories of established ES/AI systems. We then assess the status 
of ES/AI in the forensic toxicology laboratory (FTL) with emphasis on potential 
applications. We conclude with an analysis of experiences with ESs in our 
laboratory where we have used an integrated expert system to reduce laboratory 
errors, detect internal inconsistencies in data, discover new substance abuse 
subpopulations, and reduce the frequency of sample reprocessing. We have 
minimized specimen processing time and instrument wear while maximizing 
technician efficiency and thus performing more tests for the same or reduced 
costs.

DOI: 10.1093/jat/14.5.280
PMID: 2263061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 1;19(10):1183-93. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg130.

Statistical evaluation of the Predictive Toxicology Challenge 2000-2001.

Toivonen H(1), Srinivasan A, King RD, Kramer S, Helma C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, PO Box 26 (Teollisuuskatu 23), FIN-00014 
University of Helsinki, Finland. hannu.toivonen@cs.helsinki.fi

MOTIVATION: The development of in silico models to predict chemical 
carcinogenesis from molecular structure would help greatly to prevent 
environmentally caused cancers. The Predictive Toxicology Challenge (PTC) 
competition was organized to test the state-of-the-art in applying machine 
learning to form such predictive models.
RESULTS: Fourteen machine learning groups generated 111 models. The use of 
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) space allowed the models to be uniformly 
compared regardless of the error cost function. We developed a statistical 
method to test if a model performs significantly better than random in ROC 
space. Using this test as criteria five models performed better than random 
guessing at a significance level p of 0.05 (not corrected for multiple testing). 
Statistically the best predictor was the Viniti model for female mice, with p 
value below 0.002. The toxicologically most interesting models were Leuven2 for 
male mice, and Kwansei for female rats. These models performed well in the 
statistical analysis and they are in the middle of ROC space, i.e. distant from 
extreme cost assumptions. These predictive models were also independently judged 
by domain experts to be among the three most interesting, and are believed to 
include a small but significant amount of empirically learned toxicological 
knowledge.
AVAILABILITY: PTC details and data can be found at: 
http://www.predictive-toxicology.org/ptc/.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg130
PMID: 12835260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Oct 11;9:1147. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01147. eCollection 
2018.

Development of an Infrastructure for the Prediction of Biological Endpoints in 
Industrial Environments. Lessons Learned at the eTOX Project.

Pastor M(1), Quintana J(1), Sanz F(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Institut Hospital del 
Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Department of Experimental and Health 
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

In silico methods are increasingly being used for assessing the chemical safety 
of substances, as a part of integrated approaches involving in vitro and in vivo 
experiments. A paradigmatic example of these strategies is the eTOX project 
http://www.etoxproject.eu, funded by the European Innovative Medicines 
Initiative (IMI), which aimed at producing high quality predictions of in vivo 
toxicity of drug candidates and resulted in generating about 200 models for 
diverse endpoints of toxicological interest. In an industry-oriented project 
like eTOX, apart from the predictive quality, the models need to meet other 
quality parameters related to the procedures for their generation and their 
intended use. For example, when the models are used for predicting the 
properties of drug candidates, the prediction system must guarantee the complete 
confidentiality of the compound structures. The interface of the system must be 
designed to provide non-expert users all the information required to choose the 
models and appropriately interpret the results. Moreover, procedures like 
installation, maintenance, documentation, validation and versioning, which are 
common in software development, must be also implemented for the models and for 
the prediction platform in which they are implemented. In this article we 
describe our experience in the eTOX project and the lessons learned after 7 
years of close collaboration between industrial and academic partners. We 
believe that some of the solutions found and the tools developed could be useful 
for supporting similar initiatives in the future.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01147
PMCID: PMC6193068
PMID: 30364191


223. Patterns (N Y). 2022 Sep 9;3(9):100586. doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2022.100586. 
eCollection 2022 Sep 9.

Predicting drug toxicity at the intersection of informatics and biology: DTox 
builds a foundation.

Sniatynski MJ(1)(2), Kristal BS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Department of Medicine, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, 221 Longwood Ave, LM322B, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hao et al. (2022) present DTox (deep learning for toxicology), a neural network 
designed to predict and probe the sites and potential mechanisms underlying 
chemical toxicity; results provide a map to facilitate modular testing and 
improvements across multiple disparate applications.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patter.2022.100586
PMCID: PMC9481942
PMID: 36124303

Conflict of interest statement: M.J.S. and B.S.K. have a filed US patent 
application related to Sniatynski et al. (2022). The patent is not directly 
related to Hao et al., but the two may be useful in tandem.


224. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2022 Jun;18(4):888-891. doi: 10.1002/ieam.4640. 
Epub 2022 Jun 9.

Introduction to the special series, "The future of marine environmental 
monitoring and assessment".

Erichsen AC(1), Middelboe AL(1).

Author information:
(1)DHI A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Traditional marine monitoring can be a resource-intensive process that often 
covers a network of sampling stations where data are collected manually by 
divers, or discretely using in situ water samples at different depths at fixed 
positions followed by laboratory analysis. As such, environmental status is 
often reported after a delay of months or years. However, things are set to 
change for the better. Recent advances in technologies, such as remote sensing, 
machine learning techniques, modeling for non-experts, acoustic monitoring, and 
intelligent integration of modeling and sensor measurements will revolutionize 
the future of marine environmental monitoring and monitoring systems. This 
special series touches upon some of the new technologies and models that may be 
an integrated part of ecosystem assessment and management in the future. 
Although technologies are being developed and integrated for marine monitoring 
around the world, the integration with ecosystem models is still in the early 
days. Still, this series highlights inspirational examples of the time ahead of 
us. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2022;18:888-891. © 2022 The Authors. Integrated 
Environmental Assessment and Management published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & Chemistry (SETAC).

© 2022 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.4640
PMCID: PMC9328192
PMID: 35610555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Sep 30;20(19):4855. doi: 10.3390/ijms20194855.

Prediction Model with High-Performance Constitutive Androstane Receptor (CAR) 
Using DeepSnap-Deep Learning Approach from the Tox21 10K Compound Library.

Matsuzaka Y(1), Uesawa Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Informatics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 
Tokyo 204-8588, Japan. matsuzys@my-pharm.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Molecular Informatics, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 
Tokyo 204-8588, Japan. uesawa@my-pharm.ac.jp.

The constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) plays pivotal roles in drug-induced 
liver injury through the transcriptional regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes 
and transporters. Thus, identifying regulatory factors for CAR activation is 
important for understanding its mechanisms. Numerous studies conducted 
previously on CAR activation and its toxicity focused on in vivo or in vitro 
analyses, which are expensive, time consuming, and require many animals. We 
developed a computational model that predicts agonists for the CAR using the 
Toxicology in the 21st Century 10k library. Additionally, we evaluate the 
prediction performance of novel deep learning (DL)-based quantitative 
structure-activity relationship analysis called the DeepSnap-DL approach, which 
is a procedure of generating an omnidirectional snapshot portraying 
three-dimensional (3D) structures of chemical compounds. The CAR prediction 
model, which applies a 3D structure generator tool, called CORINA-generated and 
-optimized chemical structures, in the DeepSnap-DL demonstrated better 
performance than the existing methods using molecular descriptors. These results 
indicate that high performance in the prediction model using the DeepSnap-DL 
approach may be important to prepare suitable 3D chemical structures as input 
data and to enable the identification of modulators of the CAR.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20194855
PMCID: PMC6801383
PMID: 31574921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


226. Mol Inform. 2015 Apr;34(4):236-45. doi: 10.1002/minf.201400168. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

Novel Uses of In Vitro Data to Develop Quantitative Biological Activity 
Relationship Models for in Vivo Carcinogenicity Prediction.

Pradeep P(1), Povinelli RJ(2), Merrill SJ(3), Bozdag S(3), Sem DS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Marquette 
University, 1313 W. Wisconsin Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53233, USA fax: (414) 
288-5472. prachi.pradeep@marquette.edu.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Marquette University, 1515 
W. Wisconsin Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53233, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Marquette 
University, 1313 W. Wisconsin Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53233, USA fax: (414) 
288-5472.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Concordia University Wisconsin, 12800 N. Lake Shore 
Drive, Mequon, WI 53097, USA.

The availability of large in vitro datasets enables better insight into the mode 
of action of chemicals and better identification of potential mechanism(s) of 
toxicity. Several studies have shown that not all in vitro assays can contribute 
as equal predictors of in vivo carcinogenicity for development of hybrid 
Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship (QSAR) models. We propose two novel 
approaches for the use of mechanistically relevant in vitro assay data in the 
identification of relevant biological descriptors and development of 
Quantitative Biological Activity Relationship (QBAR) models for carcinogenicity 
prediction. We demonstrate that in vitro assay data can be used to develop QBAR 
models for in vivo carcinogenicity prediction via two case studies corroborated 
with firm scientific rationale. The case studies demonstrate the similarities 
between QBAR and QSAR modeling in: (i) the selection of relevant descriptors to 
be used in the machine learning algorithm, and (ii) the development of a 
computational model that maps chemical or biological descriptors to a toxic 
endpoint. The results of both the case studies show: (i) improved accuracy and 
sensitivity which is especially desirable under regulatory requirements, and 
(ii) overall adherence with the OECD/REACH guidelines. Such mechanism based 
models can be used along with QSAR models for prediction of mechanistically 
complex toxic endpoints.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.201400168
PMID: 27490169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Chem Sci. 2020 Jun 24;11(28):7335-7348. doi: 10.1039/d0sc01637c.

Neural network activation similarity: a new measure to assist decision making in 
chemical toxicology.

Allen TEH(1)(2), Wedlake AJ(2), Gelžinytė E(2), Gong C(2), Goodman JM(2), 
Gutsell S(3), Russell PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge Hodgkin Building, Lancaster Road 
Leicester LE1 7HB UK.
(2)Centre for Molecular Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Cambridge Lensfield Road Cambridge CB2 1EW UK.
(3)Unilever Safety and Environmental Assurance Centre, Colworth Science Park 
Sharnbrook Bedfordshire MK44 1LQ UK teha2@cam.ac.uk.

Deep learning neural networks, constructed for the prediction of chemical 
binding at 79 pharmacologically important human biological targets, show 
extremely high performance on test data (accuracy 92.2 ± 4.2%, MCC 0.814 ± 0.093 
and ROC-AUC 0.96 ± 0.04). A new molecular similarity measure, Neural Network 
Activation Similarity, has been developed, based on signal propagation through 
the network. This is complementary to standard Tanimoto similarity, and the 
combined use increases confidence in the computer's prediction of activity for 
new chemicals by providing a greater understanding of the underlying 
justification. The in silico prediction of these human molecular initiating 
events is central to the future of chemical safety risk assessment and improves 
the efficiency of safety decision making.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d0sc01637c
PMCID: PMC8159362
PMID: 34123016

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.


228. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 28;10(7):e0134306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134306. 
eCollection 2015.

Multiparametric Cell Cycle Analysis Using the Operetta High-Content Imager and 
Harmony Software with PhenoLOGIC.

Massey AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Vernalis Research, Granta Park, Cambridge, CB21 6GB, United Kingdom.

High-content imaging is a powerful tool for determining cell phenotypes at the 
single cell level. Characterising the effect of small molecules on cell cycle 
distribution is important for understanding their mechanism of action especially 
in oncology drug discovery but also for understanding potential toxicology 
liabilities. Here, a high-throughput phenotypic assay utilising the PerkinElmer 
Operetta high-content imager and Harmony software to determine cell cycle 
distribution is described. PhenoLOGIC, a machine learning algorithm within 
Harmony software was employed to robustly separate single cells from cell 
clumps. DNA content, EdU incorporation and pHH3 (S10) expression levels were 
subsequently utilised to separate cells into the various phases of the cell 
cycle. The assay is amenable to multiplexing with an additional pharmacodynamic 
marker to assess cell cycle changes within a specific cellular sub-population. 
Using this approach, the cell cycle distribution of γH2AX positive nuclei was 
determined following treatment with DNA damaging agents. Likewise, the assay can 
be multiplexed with Ki67 to determine the fraction of quiescent cells and with 
BrdU dual labelling to determine S-phase duration. This methodology therefore 
provides a relatively cheap, quick and high-throughput phenotypic method for 
determining accurate cell cycle distribution for small molecule mechanism of 
action and drug toxicity studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134306
PMCID: PMC4517780
PMID: 26218638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: AJM is an employee and 
stock option holder of Vernalis. This does not alter the author's adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


229. Chem Res Toxicol. 2022 Sep 30. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00269. Online ahead 
of print.

Developing Role for Artificial Intelligence in Drug Discovery in Drug Design, 
Development, and Safety Assessment.

Hurben AK(1), Erber L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Masonic Cancer Center, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States.

Artificial intelligence (AI) is a rapidly growing discipline in the field of 
chemical toxicology. Herein, we provide a broad overview of research presented 
at the Fall 2022 American Chemical Society meeting, highlighting how AI is being 
applied across various facets of drug design, development, and safety 
assessment.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.2c00269
PMID: 36179327


230. Environ Health Perspect. 1996 Oct;104 Suppl 5(Suppl 5):1031-40. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.96104s51031.

Prediction of rodent carcinogenicity bioassays from molecular structure using 
inductive logic programming.

King RD(1), Srinivasan A.

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Modelling Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, 
United Kingdom. rd_king@icrf.ac.uk

The machine learning program Progol was applied to the problem of forming the 
structure-activity relationship (SAR) for a set of compounds tested for 
carcinogenicity in rodent bioassays by the U.S. National Toxicology Program 
(NTP). Progol is the first inductive logic programming (ILP) algorithm to use a 
fully relational method for describing chemical structure in SARs, based on 
using atoms and their bond connectivities. Progol is well suited to forming SARs 
for carcinogenicity as it is designed to produce easily understandable rules 
(structural alerts) for sets of noncongeneric compounds. The Progol SAR method 
was tested by prediction of a set of compounds that have been widely predicted 
by other SAR methods (the compounds used in the NTP's first round of 
carcinogenesis predictions). For these compounds no method (human or machine) 
was significantly more accurate than Progol. Progol was the most accurate method 
that did not use data from biological tests on rodents (however, the difference 
in accuracy is not significant). The Progol predictions were based solely on 
chemical structure and the results of tests for Salmonella mutagenicity. Using 
the full NTP database, the prediction accuracy of Progol was estimated to be 63% 
(+/- 3%) using 5-fold cross validation. A set of structural alerts for 
carcinogenesis was automatically generated and the chemical rationale for them 
investigated- these structural alerts are statistically independent of the 
Salmonella mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity is predicted for the compounds used in 
the NTP's second round of carcinogenesis predictions. The results for prediction 
of carcinogenesis, taken together with the previous successful applications of 
predicting mutagenicity in nitroaromatic compounds, and inhibition of 
angiogenesis by suramin analogues, show that Progol has a role to play in 
understanding the SARs of cancer-related compounds.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.96104s51031
PMCID: PMC1469678
PMID: 8933051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Chem Inf Model. 2007 Jan-Feb;47(1):34-8. doi: 10.1021/ci600411v.

Integration of structure-activity relationship and artificial intelligence 
systems to improve in silico prediction of ames test mutagenicity.

Mazzatorta P(1), Tran LA, Schilter B, Grigorov M.

Author information:
(1)Nestlé Research Center, Quality and Safety Department, P.O. Box 44, 
Vers-chez-les-Blanc, CH-1000 Lausanne 26, Switzerland. 
paolo-francesco.mazzatorta@rdls.nestle.com

The Ames mutagenicity test in Salmonella typhimurium is a bacterial short-term 
in vitro assay aimed at detecting the mutagenicity caused by chemicals. 
Mutagenicity is considered as an early alert for carcinogenicity. After a number 
of decades, several (Q)SAR studies on this endpoint yielded enough evidence to 
make feasible the construction of reliable computational models for prediction 
of mutagenicity from the molecular structure of chemicals. In this study, we 
propose a combination of a fragment-based SAR model and an inductive database. 
The hybrid system was developed using a collection of 4337 chemicals (2401 
mutagens and 1936 nonmutagens) and tested using 753 independent compounds (437 
mutagens and 316 nonmutagens). The overall error of this system on the external 
test set compounds is 15% (sensitivity = 15%, specificity = 15%), which is 
quantitatively similar to the experimental error of Ames test data (average 
interlaboratory reproducibility determined by the National Toxicology Program). 
Moreover, each single prediction is provided with a specific confidence level. 
The results obtained give confidence that this system can be applied to support 
early and rapid evaluation of the level of mutagenicity concern.

DOI: 10.1021/ci600411v
PMID: 17238246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Molecules. 2017 Apr 23;22(4):675. doi: 10.3390/molecules22040675.

High-Performance Prediction of Human Estrogen Receptor Agonists Based on 
Chemical Structures.

Asako Y(1), Uesawa Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmaceutics Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 
Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588, Japan. y121007@std.my-pharm.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmaceutics Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 
Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588, Japan. uesawa@my-pharm.ac.jp.

Many agonists for the estrogen receptor are known to disrupt endocrine 
functioning. We have developed a computational model that predicts agonists for 
the estrogen receptor ligand-binding domain in an assay system. Our model was 
entered into the Tox21 Data Challenge 2014, a computational toxicology 
competition organized by the National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences. This competition aims to find high-performance predictive models for 
various adverse-outcome pathways, including the estrogen receptor. Our 
predictive model, which is based on the random forest method, delivered the best 
performance in its competition category. In the current study, the predictive 
performance of the random forest models was improved by strictly adjusting the 
hyperparameters to avoid overfitting. The random forest models were optimized 
from 4000 descriptors simultaneously applied to 10,000 activity assay results 
for the estrogen receptor ligand-binding domain, which have been measured and 
compiled by Tox21. Owing to the correlation between our model's and the 
challenge's results, we consider that our model currently possesses the highest 
predictive power on agonist activity of the estrogen receptor ligand-binding 
domain. Furthermore, analysis of the optimized model revealed some important 
features of the agonists, such as the number of hydroxyl groups in the 
molecules.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22040675
PMCID: PMC6154693
PMID: 28441746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


233. ACS Omega. 2022 Jul 21;7(30):26945-26951. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c03739. 
eCollection 2022 Aug 2.

Eliminating Transition State Calculations for Faster and More Accurate 
Reactivity Prediction in Sulfa-Michael Additions Relevant to Human Health and 
the Environment.

Townsend PA(1)(2), Farrar EHE(2), Grayson MN(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sustainable Chemical Technologies, Department of Chemistry, 
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, U.K.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, 
U.K.

Fast and accurate computational approaches to predicting reactivity in 
sulfa-Michael additions are required for high-throughput screening in toxicology 
(e.g., predicting excess aquatic toxicity and skin sensitization), chemical 
synthesis, covalent drug design (e.g., targeting cysteine), and data set 
generation for machine learning. The kinetic glutathione chemoassay is a 
time-consuming in chemico method used to extract kinetic data in the form of 
log(k GSH) for organic electrophiles. In this work, we use density functional 
theory to compare the use of transition states (TSs) and enolate intermediate 
structures following C-S bond formation in the prediction of log(k GSH) for a 
diverse group of 1,4 Michael acceptors. Despite the widespread use of transition 
state calculations in the literature to predict sulfa-Michael reactivity, we 
observe that intermediate structures show much better performance for the 
prediction of log(k GSH), are faster to calculate, and easier to obtain than 
TSs. Furthermore, we show how linear combinations of atomic charges from the 
isolated Michael acceptors can further improve predictions, even when using 
inexpensive semiempirical quantum chemistry methods. Our models can be used 
widely in the chemical sciences (e.g., in the prediction of toxicity relevant to 
the environment and human health, synthesis planning, and the design of 
cysteine-targeting covalent inhibitors), and represent a low-cost, sustainable 
approach to reactivity assessment.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c03739
PMCID: PMC9352231
PMID: 35936424

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


234. Teratology. 1990 Nov;42(5):521-33. doi: 10.1002/tera.1420420509.

Eliciting principles of hazard identification from experts.

Jelovsek FR(1), Mattison DR, Young JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock 72205.

National experts in the field of developmental toxicology were interviewed in 
order to elicit the principles, or rules-of-thumb, they use in determining if a 
compound or agent is likely to be a developmental hazard during pregnancy. 
Several levels of individual and cumulative consensus activity were carried out 
that resulted in consensus in 71 rules and partial consensus in an additional 24 
rules of 145 rules initially elicited. Rules could be divided generically into 
those affecting the expert's confidence in a piece of scientific evidence and 
those determining the weight of importance of that evidence in deciding about 
hazard identification. Topically, the rules also divided into those about the 
general nature or characteristics of a compound, animal studies testing for an 
effect of the compound, and human reports about the presence of absence of 
developmental effects associated with the compound. Several conclusions about 
the methodology include the following: 1) expert systems must be based on the 
knowledge of more than one expert; 2) considerable human effort is expended in 
evaluating the certainty of scientific evidence before combining the evidence 
for problem solving; 3) how experts use evidence of different degrees of 
uncertainty in their decisions is a major area that is yet to be determined and 
that may greatly affect subsequent efforts in artificial intelligence; and 4) 
knowledge elicitation by interview has limitations but is a workable methodology 
for medical decision making.

DOI: 10.1002/tera.1420420509
PMID: 2278027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1990;340B:23-48.

Identification of rodent carcinogens by an expert system.

Rosenkranz HS(1), Klopman G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106.

CASE, an artificial intelligence method for identifying structural determinants 
responsible for biological activity was applied to the U.S. National Toxicology 
Program (NTP) cancer bioassay results. CASE identified structures which were 
significantly associated with rodent carcinogenicity. On the basis of these 
structural determinants CASE exhibited a sensitivity of 0.98 and a specificity 
of 1.00. CASE showed a similarly remarkable performance in predicting the 
carcinogenicity, or lack thereof, of chemicals not in the NTP data base. A 
comparison between the activating structures (biophores) responsible for 
mutagenicity in Salmonella and rodent carcinogenicity showed a significant 
overlap, verifying that there are structural commonalities between the two 
phenomena. CASE also identified biophores significantly associated with the 
activity of non-genotoxic carcinogens, thereby suggesting the unexpected 
possibility that there is a structural commonality among the chemicals included 
in this group. A comparison between the biophores responsible for 
carcinogenicity in mice and rats resulted in the identification of common 
("universal") biophores. It is suggested that agents which contain "universal" 
biophores are more likely to present a risk to human than carcinogens that do 
not possess such biophores. CASE also permitted the recognition of 
species-specific carcinogenic biophores. While the former are primarily 
electrophiles or potential electrophiles, the latter represent non-electrophilic 
structures.

PMID: 2203007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. SAR QSAR Environ Res. 2002 Mar;13(1):1-19. doi: 10.1080/10629360290002055.

AI and SAR approaches for predicting chemical carcinogenicity: survey and status 
report.

Richardt AM(1), Benigni R.

Author information:
(1)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, 
National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratories, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA. richard.ann@epa.gov

A wide variety of artificial intelligence (AI) and structure-activity 
relationship (SAR) approaches have been applied to tackling the general problem 
of predicting rodent chemical carcinogenicity. Given the diversity of chemical 
structures and mechanisms relative to this endpoint, the shared challenge of 
these approaches is to accurately delineate classes of active chemicals 
representing distinct biological and chemical mechanism domains, and within 
those classes determine the structural features and properties responsible for 
modulating activity. In the following discussion, we present a survey of AI and 
SAR approaches that have been applied to the prediction of rodent 
carcinogenicity, and discuss these in general terms and in the context of the 
results of two organized prediction exercises (PTE-1 and PTE-2) sponsored by the 
US National Cancer Institute/National Toxicology Program. Most models 
participating in these exercises were successful in identifying major 
structural-alerting classes of active carcinogens, but failed in modeling the 
more subtle modifiers to activity within those classes. In addition, methods 
that incorporated mechanism-based reasoning or biological data along with 
structural information outperformed models limited to structural information 
exclusively. Finally, a few recent carcinogenicity-modeling efforts are 
presented illustrating progress in tackling some aspects of the carcinogenicity 
prediction problem. The first example, a QSAR model for predicting carcinogenic 
potency of aromatic amines, illustrates that success is possible within 
well-represented classes of carcinogens. From the second example, a newly 
developed FDA/OTR MultiCASE model for predicting the carcinogenicity of 
pharmaceuticals, we conclude that the definitions of biological activity and 
nature of chemicals in the training set are important determinants of the 
predictive success and specificity/sensitivity characteristics of a derived 
model.

DOI: 10.1080/10629360290002055
PMID: 12074379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Anal Chem. 2004 Nov 1;76(21):6365-73. doi: 10.1021/ac0492315.

Information-dependent acquisition-mediated LC-MS/MS screening procedure with 
semiquantitative potential.

Decaestecker TN(1), Vande Casteele SR, Wallemacq PE, Van Peteghem CH, Defore DL, 
Van Bocxlaer JF.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Biochemistry and Clinical Analysis, Ghent University, 
Harelbekestraat 72, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

The development of a LC-MS/MS general unknown screening procedure for 
toxicologically relevant substances in blood samples by means of 
information-dependent acquisition on a Q-TOF is reported. IDA is an artificial 
intelligence-based product ion scan mode providing automatic "on-the-fly" MS to 
MS/MS switching. By performing information-dependent scanning at two different 
fragmentation energies, two collision-induced dissociation product ion spectra 
for each of the detected compounds are generated. As such, information-rich 
MS/MS spectra are obtained from precursor ions not known beforehand. In 
addition, limitation of the MS/MS acquisition time to an acceptable minimum 
resulted in an almost instantaneous switch back to the MS mode. As such, this 
approach provided MS chromatograms that still could be of use for 
semiquantitative purposes. Since the switching intensity threshold, 
unequivocally related to the background noise, proved a critical parameter, the 
solid-phase extraction procedure, the liquid chromatographic conditions, and the 
mass spectrometric parameters all were optimized to the advantage of 
information-dependent acquisition. Finally, the screening procedure we developed 
was benchmarked, on one hand, qualitatively against the results obtained from 
traditional GUS approaches in a number of routine toxicological laboratories (20 
samples) and, on the other hand, quantitatively with respect to its potential 
against established LC-MS/MS methods (7 samples). The procedure performed very 
well from a qualitative point of view; almost all of the drugs detected by the 
conventional techniques were identified, as well as additional drugs that were 
not previously reported. The procedure proved well-suited for an initial 
semiquantitative assessment, as is customary in, for example, forensic 
toxicology before accurate intoxication levels are determined using targeted 
analytical analyses.

DOI: 10.1021/ac0492315
PMID: 15516129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1990;16(3):149-77. doi: 10.1002/em.2850160304.

Significant differences in the structural basis of the induction of sister 
chromatid exchanges and chromosomal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Rosenkranz HS(1), Ennever FK, Dimayuga M, Klopman G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio.

The structural basis of the induction of sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) and 
chromosomal aberrations (Cvt) in Chinese hamster ovary cells was investigated by 
the CASE (Computer Automated Structure Evaluation) method, an 
artificial-intelligence-based system. Using the relevant National Toxicology 
Program data bases CASE identified a set of structural determinants responsible 
for the induction of SCE and another one for Cvt. A comparison between the 
structural determinants associated with SCE and Cvt revealed an overlap of only 
22.6%, while the overlap between SCE and the determinants of mutagenicity in 
Salmonella is 54.5%. This indicates a) that the structural bases of the two 
phenomena differ and b) that it is likely that SCE, but not Cvt, involves a 
significant electrophilic/DNA-damaging component.

DOI: 10.1002/em.2850160304
PMID: 2209572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Mar;21(3):619-32. doi: 10.1021/tx700296t. Epub 2008 Feb 
8.

3D-MEDNEs: an alternative "in silico" technique for chemical research in 
toxicology. 2. quantitative proteome-toxicity relationships (QPTR) based on mass 
spectrum spiral entropy.

Cruz-Monteagudo M(1), González-Díaz H, Borges F, Dominguez ER, Cordeiro MN.

Author information:
(1)Physico-Chemical Molecular Research Unit, Department of Organic Chemistry, 
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, 4150-047 Porto, Portugal.

Low range mass spectra (MS) characterization of serum proteome offers the best 
chance of discovering proteome-(early drug-induced cardiac toxicity) 
relationships, called here Pro-EDICToRs. However, due to the thousands of 
proteins involved, finding the single disease-related protein could be a hard 
task. The search for a model based on general MS patterns becomes a more 
realistic choice. In our previous work ( González-Díaz, H. , et al. Chem. Res. 
Toxicol. 2003, 16, 1318- 1327 ), we introduced the molecular structure 
information indices called 3D-Markovian electronic delocalization entropies 
(3D-MEDNEs). In this previous work, quantitative structure-toxicity relationship 
(QSTR) techniques allowed us to link 3D-MEDNEs with blood toxicological 
properties of drugs. In this second part, we extend 3D-MEDNEs to numerically 
encode biologically relevant information present in MS of the serum proteome for 
the first time. Using the same idea behind QSTR techniques, we can seek now by 
analogy a quantitative proteome-toxicity relationship (QPTR). The new QPTR 
models link MS 3D-MEDNEs with drug-induced toxicological properties from blood 
proteome information. We first generalized Randic's spiral graph and lattice 
networks of protein sequences to represent the MS of 62 serum proteome samples 
with more than 370 100 intensity ( I i ) signals with m/ z bandwidth above 
700-12000 each. Next, we calculated the 3D-MEDNEs for each MS using the software 
MARCH-INSIDE. After that, we developed several QPTR models using different 
machine learning and MS representation algorithms to classify samples as control 
or positive Pro-EDICToRs samples. The best QPTR proposed showed accuracy values 
ranging from 83.8% to 87.1% and leave-one-out (LOO) predictive ability of 
77.4-85.5%. This work demonstrated that the idea behind classic drug QSTR models 
may be extended to construct QPTRs with proteome MS data.

DOI: 10.1021/tx700296t
PMID: 18257557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mutat Res. 1992 Aug;272(1):59-71. doi: 10.1016/0165-1161(92)90008-a.

Testing by artificial intelligence: computational alternatives to the 
determination of mutagenicity.

Klopman G(1), Rosenkranz HS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 
44106.

In order to develop methods for evaluating the predictive performance of 
computer-driven structure-activity methods (SAR) as well as to determine the 
limits of predictivity, we investigated the behavior of two Salmonella 
mutagenicity data bases: (a) a subset from the Genetox Program and (b) one from 
the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP). For molecules common to the two data 
bases, the experimental concordance was 76% when "marginals" were included and 
81% when they were excluded. Three SAR methods were evaluated: CASE, MULTICASE 
and CASE/Graph Indices (CASE/GI). The programs "learned" the Genetox data base 
and used it to predict NTP molecules that were not present in the Genetox 
compilation. The concordances were 72, 80 and 47% respectively. Obviously, the 
MULTICASE version is superior and approaches the 85% interlaboratory variability 
observed for the Salmonella mutagenicity assays when the latter was carried out 
under carefully controlled conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-1161(92)90008-a
PMID: 1380119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mutat Res. 1990 Jan;228(1):51-80. doi: 10.1016/0027-5107(90)90014-u.

The structural basis of the mutagenicity of chemicals in Salmonella typhimurium: 
the National Toxicology Program Data Base.

Rosenkranz HS(1), Klopman G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106.

A portion of the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP) Salmonella typhimurium 
mutagenicity data base was analyzed by CASE, an artificial intelligence SAR 
system. CASE identified 13 structural determinants which, with a high 
probability (p less than or equal to 0.05) predicted the likelihood of 
mutagenicity of the 243 chemicals in the data base (sensitivity = 0.989; 
specificity = 0.950) as well as of chemicals not included in the data base. CASE 
also identified an additional set of structures which were highly predictive of 
mutagenic potency (sensitivity = 0.949; specificity = 1.00). Even though there 
is little overlap among the chemicals included in the NTP and Gene-Tox 
Salmonella data bases, CASE found significant similarities between the 
structural determinants of the mutagenicity in the two data bases, thereby 
validating the analyses and indicating a commonality in the structural basis of 
mutagenicity.

DOI: 10.1016/0027-5107(90)90014-u
PMID: 2405260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mutagenesis. 1990 Sep;5(5):425-32. doi: 10.1093/mutage/5.5.425.

Prediction of the carcinogenicity in rodents of chemicals currently being tested 
by the US National Toxicology Program: structure-activity correlations.

Rosenkranz HS(1), Klopman G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106.

CASE, an artificial intelligence structure-activity relational system, was used 
to predict the carcinogenicity of a group of chemicals currently being tested in 
rodent bioassays by the US National Toxicology Program. The 'learning set' for 
the CASE predictions consisted of the results of previous 252 rodent 
carcinogenicity bioassays.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/5.5.425
PMID: 2263200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Carcinogenesis. 1990 Feb;11(2):349-53. doi: 10.1093/carcin/11.2.349.

Natural pesticides present in edible plants are predicted to be carcinogenic.

Rosenkranz HS(1), Klopman G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106.

Based upon the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) rodent carcinogenicity data 
base, CASE, an artificial intelligence structure-activity evaluation method, 
predicts that a large proportion of natural pesticides present in edible plants 
are rodent carcinogens.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/11.2.349
PMID: 2302762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]